4  Overview of security architecture


4.1  Security domains

The figure illustrates the following security domains:

-  Network access security (I): the set of security features that enable a
UE to authenticate and access services via the network securely, including
the 3GPP access and Non-3GPP access, and in particularly, to protect
against attacks on the (radio) interfaces. In addition, it includes the
security context delivery from SN to AN for the access security.

-  Network domain security (II): the set of security features that enable
network nodes to securely exchange signalling data and user plane data.

-  User domain security (III): the set of security features that secure the
user access to mobile equipment.

-  Application domain security (IV): the set of security features that
enable applications in the user domain and in the provider domain to
exchange messages securely. Application domain security is out of scope of
the present document.

-  SBA domain security (V): the set of security features that enables
network functions of the SBA architecture to securely communicate within
the serving network domain and with other network domains . Such features
include network function registration, discovery, and authorization
security aspects, as well as the protection for the service-based
interfaces. SBA domain security is a new security feature compared to TS
33.401 [10].

-  Visibility and configurability of security (VI): the set of features
that enable the user to be informed whether a security feature is in
operation or not.

NOTE:  The visibility and configurability of security is not shown in the
figure.


4.2  Security at the perimeter of the 5G Core network


4.2.0  General

The security specified in this document applies to both roaming and PLMN
interconnect.

Editor's Note: check full specification on removing references to roaming
unless specific to roaming.


4.2.1  Security Edge Protection Proxy (SEPP)

The 5G System architecture introduces a Security Edge Protection Proxy
(SEPP) as an entity sitting at the perimeter of the PLMN for protecting
control plane messages.

The SEPP enforces inter-PLMN security on the N32 interface.


4.2.2  Inter-PLMN UP Security (IPUPS)

The 5G System architecture introduces Inter-PLMN UP Security (IPUPS) at the
perimeter of the PLMN for protecting user plane messages.

The IPUPS is a functionality of the UPF that enforces GTP-U security on the
N9 interface between UPFs of the visited and home PLMNs.

NOTE:  IPUPS can be activated with other functionality in a UPF or
activated in a UPF that is dedicated to be used for IPUPS functionality
(see also TS 23.501 [2], clause 5.8.2.14).


4.3  Security entities in the 5G Core network

The 5G System architecture introduces the following security entities in
the 5G Core network:

AUSF:  AUthentication Server Function;

ARPF:  Authentication credential Repository and Processing Function;

SIDF:    Subscription Identifier De-concealing Function;

SEAF:    SEcurity Anchor Function.




5  Security requirements and features


5.1  General security requirements


5.1.1  Mitigation of bidding down attacks

An attacker could attempt a bidding down attack by making the UE and the
network entities respectively believe that the other side does not support
a security feature, even when both sides in fact support that security
feature. It shall be ensured that a bidding down attack, in the above
sense, can be prevented.


5.1.2  Authentication and Authorization

The 5G system shall satisfy the following requirements.

Subscription authentication: The serving network shall authenticate the
Subscription Permanent Identifier (SUPI) in the process of authentication
and key agreement between UE and network.

Serving network authentication: The UE shall authenticate the serving
network identifier through implicit key authentication.

NOTE 1:  The meaning of 'implicit key authentication' here is that
authentication is provided through the successful use of keys resulting
from authentication and key agreement in subsequent procedures.

NOTE 2:  The preceding requirement does not imply that the UE authenticates
a particular entity, e.g. an AMF, within a serving network.

UE authorization: The serving network shall authorize the UE through the
subscription profile obtained from the home network. UE authorization is
based on the authenticated SUPI.

Serving network authorization by the home network: Assurance shall be
provided to the UE that it is connected to a serving network that is
authorized by the home network to provide services to the UE. This
authorization is 'implicit' in the sense that it is implied by a successful
authentication and key agreement run.

Access network authorization: Assurance shall be provided to the UE that it
is connected to an access network that is authorized by the serving network
to provide services to the UE. This authorization is 'implicit' in the
sense that it is implied by a successful establishment of access network
security. This access network authorization applies to all types of access
networks.

Unauthenticated Emergency Services: In order to meet regulatory
requirements in some regions, the 5G system shall support unauthenticated
access for emergency services. This requirement applies to all MEs and only
to those serving networks where regulatory requirements for unauthenticated
emergency services exist. Serving networks located in regions where
unauthenticated emergency services are forbidden shall not support this
feature.


5.1.3  Requirements on 5GC and NG-RAN related to keys

The 5GC and NG-RAN shall allow for use of encryption and integrity
protection algorithms for AS and NAS protection having keys of length 128
bits. The network interfaces shall support the transport of 256 bit keys.

The keys used for UP, NAS and AS protection shall be dependent on the
algorithm with which they are used.


5.2  Requirements on the UE


5.2.1  General

The support and usage of ciphering and integrity protection between the UE
and the ng-eNB is identical to the support and usage of ciphering and
integrity protection between the UE and the eNB as specified in TS 33.401
[10] with the following additional requirement(s):

-  The UE shall support the use of integrity protection with the ng-eNB
over the Uu interface if it supports E-UTRA connected to 5GC.

-  The UE shall indicate its support of integrity protection with the ng-
eNB if it supports E-UTRA connected to 5GC.

The PEI shall be securely stored in the UE to ensure the integrity of the
PEI.


5.2.2  User data and signalling data confidentiality

The UE shall support ciphering of user data between the UE and the gNB.

The UE shall activate ciphering of user data based on the indication sent
by the gNB.

The UE shall support ciphering of RRC and NAS-signalling.

The UE shall implement the following ciphering algorithms:

NEA0, 128-NEA1, 128-NEA2 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

The UE may implement the following ciphering algorithm:

128-NEA3 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

The UE shall implement the ciphering algorithms as specified in TS 33.401
[10] if it supports E-UTRA connected to 5GC.

Confidentiality protection of the user data between the UE and the gNB is
optional to use.

Confidentiality protection of the RRC-signalling, and NAS-signalling is
optional to use.

Confidentiality protection should be used whenever regulations permit.


5.2.3  User data and signalling data integrity

The UE shall support integrity protection and replay protection of user
data between the UE and the gNB. The UE shall support integrity protection
of user data at any data rate, up to and including, the highest data rate
supported by the UE.

The UE shall activate integrity protection of user data based on the
indication sent by the gNB.

The UE shall support integrity protection and replay protection of RRC and
NAS-signalling.

The UE shall implement the following integrity protection algorithms:

NIA0, 128-NIA1, 128-NIA2 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

The UE may implement the following integrity protection algorithm:

128-NIA3 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

The UE shall implement the integrity algorithms as specified in TS 33.401
[10] if it supports E-UTRA connected to 5GC.

Integrity protection of the user data between the UE and the gNB is
optional to use.

NOTE:  Integrity protection of user plane adds the overhead of the packet
size and increases the processing load both in the UE and the gNB.

Integrity protection of the RRC-signalling, and NAS-signalling is mandatory
to use, except in the following cases:

All NAS signalling messages except those explicitly listed in TS 24.501
[35] as exceptions shall be integrity-protected.

All RRC signalling messages except those explicitly listed in TS 38.331
[22] as exceptions shall be integrity-protected with an integrity
protection algorithm different from NIA0, except for unauthenticated
emergency calls.

The UE shall implement NIA0 for integrity protection of NAS and RRC
signalling. NIA0 is only allowed for unauthenticated emergency session as
specified in clause 10.2.2.


5.2.4  Secure storage and processing of subscription credentials

The following requirements apply for the storage and processing of the
subscription credentials used to access the 5G network:

The subscription credential(s) shall be integrity protected within the UE
using a tamper resistant secure hardware component.

The long-term key(s) of the subscription credential(s) (i.e. K) shall be
confidentiality protected within the UE using a tamper resistant secure
hardware component.

The long-term key(s) of the subscription credential(s) shall never be
available in the clear outside of the tamper resistant secure hardware
component.

The authentication algorithm(s) that make use of the subscription
credentials shall always be executed within the tamper resistant secure
hardware component.

It shall be possible to perform a security evaluation / assessment
according to the respective security requirements of the tamper resistant
secure hardware component.

NOTE:  The security assessment scheme used for the security evaluation of
the tamper resistant secure hardware component is outside the scope of 3GPP
specifications.


5.2.5  Subscriber privacy

The UE shall support 5G-GUTI.

The SUPI should not be transferred in clear text over NG-RAN except routing
information, e.g. Mobile Country Code (MCC) and Mobile Network Code (MNC).

The Home Network Public Key shall be stored in the USIM.

The protection scheme identifier shall be stored in the USIM.

The Home Network Public Key Identifier shall be stored in the USIM.

The SUCI calculation indication, either USIM or ME calculating the SUCI,
shall be stored in USIM.

The ME shall support the null-scheme.If the home network has not
provisioned the Home Network Public Key in USIM, the SUPI protection in
initial registration procedure is not provided. In this case, the null-
scheme shall be used by the ME.

Based on home operator's decision, indicated by the USIM, the calculation
of the SUCI shall be performed either by the USIM or by the ME.

NOTE 1:  If the SUCI calculation indication is not present, the calculation
is in the ME.

In case of an unauthenticated emergency call, privacy protection for SUPI
is not required.

Provisioning, and updating the Home Network Public Key, Home Network Public
Key Identifier, protection scheme identifier, Routing Indicator, and SUCI
calculation indication in the USIM shall be in the control of the home
network operator.

NOTE 2:  The provisioning and updating of the Home Network Public Key, Home
Network Public Key Identifier, protection scheme identifier, and SUCI
calculation indication is out of the scope of the present document. It can
be implemented using, e.g. the Over the Air (OTA) mechanism. Routing
Indicator can be updated, e.g., by OTA or as defined in clause 6.15.

Subscriber privacy enablement shall be under the control of the home
network of the subscriber.

The UE shall only send the PEI in the NAS protocol after NAS security
context is established, unless during emergency registration when no NAS
security context can be established.

The Routing Indicator shall be stored in the USIM. If the Routing Indicator
is not present in the USIM, the ME shall set it to a default value as
defined in TS 23.003 [19].


5.3  Requirements on the gNB


5.3.1  General

The security requirements given in this section apply to all types of gNBs.
More stringent requirements for specific types of gNBs may be defined in
other 3GPP specifications.


5.3.2  User data and signalling data confidentiality

The gNB shall support ciphering of user data between the UE and the gNB.

The gNB shall activate ciphering of user data based on the security policy
sent by the SMF.

The gNB shall support ciphering of RRC-signalling.

The gNB shall implement the following ciphering algorithms:

-  NEA0, 128-NEA1, 128-NEA2 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

The gNB may implement the following ciphering algorithm:

-  128-NEA3 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

Confidentiality protection of user data between the UE and the gNB is
optional to use.

Confidentiality protection of the RRC-signalling is optional to use.

Confidentiality protection should be used whenever regulations permit.


5.3.3  User data and signalling data integrity

The gNB shall support integrity protection and replay protection of user
data between the UE and the gNB.

The gNB shall activate integrity protection of user data based on the
security policy sent by the SMF.

The gNB shall support integrity protection and replay protection of RRC-
signalling.

The gNB shall support the following integrity protection algorithms:

-  NIA0, 128-NIA1, 128-NIA2 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

The gNB may support the following integrity protection algorithm:

-  128-NIA3 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

Integrity protection of the user data between the UE and the gNB is
optional to use, and shall not use NIA0.

NOTE:  Integrity protection of user plane adds the overhead of the packet
size and increases the processing load both in the UE and the gNB. NIA0
will add an unnecessary overhead of 32-bits MAC with no security benefits.

All RRC signalling messages except those explicitly listed in TS 38.331
[22] as exceptions shall be integrity-protected with an integrity
protection algorithm different from NIA0, except for unauthenticated
emergency calls.

NIA0 shall be disabled in gNB in the deployments where support of
unauthenticated emergency session is not a regulatory requirement.


5.3.4  Requirements for the gNB setup and configuration

Setting up and configuring gNBs by O&M systems shall be authenticated and
authorized by gNB so that attackers shall not be able to modify the gNB
settings and software configurations via local or remote access.

-  The certificate enrolment mechanism specified in TS 33.310 [5] for base
station should be supported for gNBs. The decision on whether to use the
enrolment mechanism is left to operators.

-  Communication between the O&M systems and the gNB shall be
confidentiality, integrity and replay protected from unauthorized parties.
The security associations between the gNB and an entity in the 5G Core or
in an O&M domain trusted by the operator shall be supported. These security
association establishments shall be mutually authenticated. The security
associations shall be realized according to TS 33.210 [3] and TS 33.310
[5].

-  The gNB shall be able to ensure that software/data change attempts are
authorized.

-  The gNB shall use authorized data/software.

-  Sensitive parts of the boot-up process shall be executed with the help
of the secure environment.

-  Confidentiality of software transfer towards the gNB shall be ensured.

-  Integrity protection of software transfer towards the gNB shall be
ensured.

-  The gNB software update shall be verified before its installation (cf.
sub-clause 4.2.3.3.5 of TS 33.117 [24]).


5.3.5  Requirements for key management inside the gNB

The 5GC provides subscription specific session keying material for the
gNBs, which also hold long term keys used for authentication and security
association setup purposes. Protecting all these keys is important. The
following requirements apply:

-  Any part of a gNB deployment that stores or processes keys in cleartext
shall be protected from physical attacks. If not, the whole entity is
placed in a physically secure location, then keys in cleartext shall be
stored and processed in a secure environment. Keys stored inside a secure
environment in any part of the gNB shall never leave the secure environment
except when done in accordance with this or other 3GPP specifications.


5.3.6  Requirements for handling user plane data for the gNB

The following requirements apply:

-  Any part of a gNB deployment that stores or processes user plane data in
cleartext shall be protected from physical attacks. If not, the whole
entity is placed in a physically secure location, then user plane data in
cleartext shall be stored and processed in a secure environment.


5.3.7  Requirements for handling control plane data for the gNB

The following requirements apply:

-  Any part of a gNB deployment that stores or processes control plane data
in cleartext shall be protected from physical attacks. If not, the whole
entity is placed in a physically secure location, then control plane data
in cleartext shall be stored and processed in a secure environment.


5.3.8  Requirements for secure environment of the gNB

The secure environment is logically defined within the gNB. It ensures
protection and secrecy of all sensitive information and operations from any
unauthorized access or exposure. The following list defines the
requirements of the secure environment:

-  The secure environment shall support secure storage of sensitive data,
e.g. long-term cryptographic secrets and vital configuration data.

-  The secure environment shall support the execution of sensitive
functions, e.g. en-/decryption of user data and the basic steps within
protocols which use long term secrets (e.g. in authentication protocols).

-  The secure environment shall support the execution of sensitive parts of
the boot process.

-  The secure environment's integrity shall be assured.

-  Only authorised access shall be granted to the secure environment, i.e.
to data stored and used within it, and to functions executed within it.


5.3.9  Requirements for the gNB F1 interfaces

Requirements given below apply to gNBs with split DU-CU implementations
using F1 interface defined in TS 38.470 [31]. Signalling traffic (i.e. both
F1-C interface management traffic defined in TS 38.470 [31] and F1-C
signalling bearer defined in TS 38.472 [32]) and user plane data can be
sent on the F1 interface between a given DU and its CU.

-  F1-C interface shall support confidentiality, integrity and replay
protection.

-  All management traffic carried over the CU-DU link shall be integrity,
confidentiality and replay protected.

-  The gNB shall support confidentiality, integrity and replay protection
on the gNB DU-CU F1-U interface [33] for user plane.

-  F1-C and management traffic carried over the CU-DU link shall be
protected independently from F1-U traffic.

NOTE:  The above requirements allow to have F1-U protected differently
(including turning integrity and/or encryption off or onfor F1-U) from all
other traffic on the CU-DU (e.g. the traffic over F1-C).


5.3.10 Requirements for the gNB E1 interfaces

Requirements given below apply to gNBs with split DU-CU implementations,
particularly with an open interface between CU-CP and CU-UP using the E1
interface defined in TS 38.460 [41].

-  The E1 interface between CU-CP and CU-UP shall be confidentiality,
integrity and replay protected.


5.4  Requirements on the ng-eNB

The security requirements for ng-eNB are as specified for eNB in TS 33.401
[10] with the following additional requirement:

-  ng-eNB shall support the use of integrity protection with the UE over
the Uu interface.


5.5  Requirements on the AMF


5.5.1  Signalling data confidentiality

The AMF shall support ciphering of NAS-signalling.

The AMF shall support the following ciphering algorithms:

-  NEA0, 128-NEA1, 128-NEA2 as defined in  Annex D of the present document.

The AMF may support the following ciphering algorithm:

-  128-NEA3 as defined in Annex D of the present document.

Confidentiality protection NAS-signalling is optional to use.

Confidentiality protection should be used whenever regulations permit.


5.5.2  Signalling data integrity

The AMF shall support integrity protection and replay protection of NAS-
signalling.

The AMF shall support the following integrity protection algorithms:

-  NIA-0, 128-NIA1, 128-NIA2 as defined in  Annex D of the present
document.

The AMF may support the following integrity protection algorithm:

-  128-NIA3 as defined in  Annex D of the present document.

NIA0 shall be disabled in AMF in the deployments where support of
unauthenticated emergency session is not a regulatory requirement.

All NAS signalling messages except those explicitly listed in TS 24.501
[35] as exceptions shall be integrity-protected with an algorithm different
to NIA-0 except for emergency calls.


5.5.3  Subscriber privacy

The AMF shall support to trigger primary authentication using the SUCI.

The AMF shall support assigning 5G-GUTI to the UE.

The AMF shall support reallocating 5G-GUTI to UE.

The AMF shall be able to confirm SUPI from UE and from home network. The
AMF shall deny service to the UE if this confirmation fails.


5.6  Requirements on the SEAF

The security anchor function (SEAF) provides the authentication
functionality via the AMF in the serving network. The SEAF shall fulfil the
following requirements:

The SEAF shall support primary authentication using SUCI.


5.7  Void


5.8  Requirements on the UDM


5.8.1  Generic requirements

The long-term key(s) used for authentication and security association setup
purposes shall be protected from physical attacks and shall never leave the
secure environment of the UDM/ARPF unprotected.

NOTE 1: Security mechanisms for protection of subscription credentials in
ARPF are left to implementation.

NOTE 2: Security mechanisms for storage of subscription credentials in the
UDR and for the transfer of authentication subscription data (as specified
in 3GPP TS 29.505 [70]) between UDR and ARPF are left to implementation.


5.8.2  Subscriber privacy related requirements to UDM and SIDF

The SIDF is responsible for de-concealment of the SUCI and shall fulfil the
following requirements:

-  The SIDF shall be a service offered by UDM.

-  The SIDF shall resolve the SUPI from the SUCI based on the protection
scheme used to generate the SUCI.

The Home Network Private Key used for subscriber privacy shall be protected
from physical attacks in the UDM.

The UDM shall hold the Home Network Public Key Identifier(s) for the
private/public key pair(s) used for subscriber privacy.

The algorithm used for subscriber privacy shall be executed in the secure
environment of the UDM.


5.8a Requirements on AUSF

The Authentication server function (AUSF) shall handle authentication
requests for both, 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

The AUSF shall provide SUPI to the VPLMN only after authentication
confirmation if authentication request with SUCI was sent by VPLMN.

The AUSF shall inform the UDM that a successful or unsuccessful
authentication of a subscriber has occurred.


5.9  Core network security


5.9.1  Trust boundaries

It is assumed for the set of requirements in this sub-clause that mobile
network operators subdivide their networks into trust zones. Subnetworks of
different operators are assumed to lie in different trust zones. Messages
that traverse trust boundaries shall follow the requirements in sub-clause
5.9.2 of the present document, if not protected end to end by NDS/IP as
specified in TS 33.210 [3].


5.9.2  Requirements on service-based architecture


5.9.2.1  Security Requirements for service registration, discovery and
         authorization

NF Service based discovery and registration shall support confidentiality,
integrity, and replay protection.

NRF shall be able to ensure that NF Discovery and registration requests are
authorized.

NF Service based discovery and registration shall be able to hide the
topology of the available / supported NF's in one administrative/trust
domain from entities in different trust/administrative domains (e.g.
between NFs in the visited and the home networks.)

NF Service Request and Response procedure shall support mutual
authentication between NF Service Consumer and NF Service Producer.

Each NF shall validate all incoming messages. Messages that are not valid
according to the protocol specification and network state shall be either
rejected or discarded by the NF.


5.9.2.2  NRF security requirements

The Network Repository Function (NRF) receives NF Discovery Request from an
NF instance, provides the information of the discovered NF instances to the
NF instance, and maintains NF profiles.

The following NRF service-based architecture security requirements shall
apply:

NRF and NFs that are requesting service shall be mutually authenticated.

NRF may provide authentication and authorization to NFs for establishing
secure communication between each other


5.9.2.3  NEF security requirements

The Network Exposure Function (NEF) supports external exposure of
capabilities of Network Functions to Application Functions, which interact
with the relevant Network Functions via the NEF.

The interface between the NEF and the Application Function shall fulfil the
following requirements:

-  Integrity protection, replay protection and confidentiality protection
for communication between the NEF and Application Function shall be
supported.

-  Mutual authentication between the NEF and Application Function shall be
supported.

-  Internal 5G Core information such as DNN, S-NSSAI etc., shall not be
sent outside the 3GPP operator domain.

-  SUPI shall not be sent outside the 3GPP operator domain by NEF.

The NEF shall be able to determine whether the Application Function is
authorized to interact with the relevant Network Functions..


5.9.2.4  Requirements on the Service Communication Proxy (SCP)

The SCP has interfaces with Network Functions (NF) and peer SCPs within the
PLMN. The interface between the SCP and the NFs and between the two SCPs
shall fulfil the following requirements:

-  Mutual authentication shall be performed between the SCP and NFs, and
between the two SCPs within the PLMN.

-  All communication between the SCP and NFs and between SCPs shall be
confidentiality, integrity and replay protected.

If SCP endpoints are co-located with the NFs, the above two requirements
may be satisfied by colocation.

The SCP shall provide confidentiality, integrity and replay protection for
its internal communication over SCP internal network interfaces.


5.9.3  Requirements for e2e core network interconnection security


5.9.3.1  General

The present sub-clause contains requirements common to sub-clauses 5.9.2
and 5.9.3.

A solution for e2e core network interconnection security shall satisfy the
following requirements.

The solution shall support application layer mechanisms for addition,
deletion and modification of message elements by intermediate nodes except
for specific message elements described in the present document.

NOTE:  Typical example for such a case is IPX providers modifying messages
for routing purposes.

The solution shall provide confidentiality and/or integrity end-to-end
between source and destination network for specific message elements
identified in the present document. For this requirement to be fulfilled,
the SEPP  cf [2], clause 6.2.17 shall be present at the edge of the source
and destination networks dedicated to handling e2e Core Network
Interconnection Security. The confidentiality and/or integrity for the
message elements is provided between two SEPPs of the source and
destination PLMN.

The destination network shall be able to determine the authenticity of the
source network that sent the specific message elements protected according
to the preceding bullet. For this requirement to be fulfilled, it shall
suffice that a SEPP in the destination network that is dedicated to
handling e2e Core Network Interconnection Security can determine the
authenticity of the source network.

The solution should have minimal impact and additions to 3GPP-defined
network elements.

The solution should be using standard security protocols.

The solution shall cover interfaces used for roaming purposes.

The solution should take into account considerations on performance and
overhead.

The solution shall cover prevention of replay attacks.

The solution shall cover algorithm negotiation and prevention of bidding
down attacks.

The solution should take into account operational aspects of key
management.


5.9.3.2  Requirements for Security Edge Protection Proxy (SEPP)

The SEPP shall act as a non-transparent proxy node.

The SEPP shall protect application layer control plane messages between two
NFs belonging to different PLMNs or SNPNs that use the N32 interface to
communicate with each other.

The SEPP shall perform mutual authentication and negotiation of cipher
suites with the SEPP in the roaming network.

The SEPP shall handle key management aspects that involve setting up the
required cryptographic keys needed for securing messages on the N32
interface between two SEPPs.

The SEPP shall perform topology hiding by limiting the internal topology
information visible to external parties.

As a reverse proxy the SEPP shall provide a single point of access and
control to internal NFs.

The receiving SEPP shall be able to verify whether the sending SEPP is
authorized to use the PLMN ID or SNPN ID in the received N32 message.

The SEPP shall be able to clearly differentiate between certificates used
for authentication of peer SEPPs and certificates used for authentication
of intermediates performing message modifications.

NOTE 1: Such a differentiation could be done e.g. by implementing separate
certificate storages.

The SEPP shall discard malformed N32 signaling messages.

The sending SEPP shall reject messages received from the NF (directly or
via SCP) with JSON including "encBlockIndex" (regardless of the encoding
used for that JSON request).

The receiving SEPP shall reject any message in which an IPX has inserted or
relocated references to encBlockIndex.

The SEPP shall implement rate-limiting functionalities to defend itself and
subsequent NFs against excessive CP signaling. This includes SEPP-to-SEPP
signaling messages.

The SEPP shall implement anti-spoofing mechanisms that enable cross-layer
validation of source and destination address and identifiers (e.g. FQDNs or
PLMN IDs).

NOTE 2: An example for such an anti-spoofing mechanism is the following: If
there is a mismatch between different layers of the message or the
destination address does not belong to the SEPPs own PLMN, the message is
discarded.

The SEPP shall be able to use one or more PLMN IDs. In the situation that a
PLMN is using more than one PLMN ID, this PLMN's SEPP may use the same N32-
connection for all of the PLMN's PLMN IDs, with each of the PLMN's remote
PLMN partners. If different PLMNs are represented by the PLMN IDs supported
by a SEPP, the SEPP shall use separate N32-connections for each pair of
home and visited PLMN.


5.9.3.3  Protection of attributes

Integrity protection shall be applied to all attributes transferred over
the N32-f interface.

Confidentiality protection shall be applied to all attributes specified in
SEPP's Data-type Encryption Policy (clause13.2.3.2). The following
attributes shall be confidentiality protected when being sent over the N32-
f interface, irrespective of the Data-type Encryption Policy:

-  Authentication Vectors

-  Cryptographic material

-  Location data, e.g. Cell ID and Physical Cell ID

The following attributes should additionally be confidentiality protected
when being sent over the N32-f interface:

-  SUPI.


5.9.3.4  Requirements for IPUPS functionality

The IPUPS shall only forward GTP-U packets that contain an F-TEID that
belongs to an active PDU session and discard all others.

The IPUPS shall discard malformed GTP-U messages.


5.10 Visibility and configurability


5.10.1 Security visibility

Although in general the security features should be transparent to the user
or application, for certain events and according to the user's or
application's concern, greater visibility of the operation of following
security feature shall be provided:

-  AS confidentiality: (AS confidentiality, Confidentiality algorithm,
bearer information)

-  AS integrity: (AS integrity, Integrity algorithm, bearer information)

-  NAS confidentiality: (NAS confidentiality, Confidentiality algorithm)

-  NAS integrity: (NAS integrity, Integrity algorithm)

The UE shall provide above security information to the applications in the
UE (e.g. via APIs), on a per PDU session granularity.

The serving network identifier shall be available for applications in the
UE.


5.10.2 Security configurability

Security configurability lets a user to configure certain security feature
settings on a UE that allows the user to manage additional capability or
use certain advanced security features.

The following configurability feature should be provided:

-  Granting or denying access to USIM without authentication as described
in TS 33.401 [10].


5.11 Requirements for algorithms, and algorithm selection


5.11.1 Algorithm identifier values


5.11.1.1 Ciphering algorithm identifier values

All identifiers and names specified in this sub-clause are for 5G NAS and
New Radio. In relation to AS capabilities, the identifiers and names for E-
UTRAN connected to 5GC are specified in TS 33.401 [10].

Each encryption algorithm will be assigned a 4-bit identifier. The
following values for ciphering algorithms are defined:

"00002"         NEA0       Null ciphering algorithm;

"00012"         128-NEA1   128-bit SNOW 3G based algorithm;

"00102"         128-NEA2   128-bit AES based algorithm; and

"00112"         128-NEA3   128-bit ZUC based algorithm.

128-NEA1 is based on SNOW 3G (see TS 35.215 [14]).

128-NEA2 is based on 128-bit AES [15] in CTR mode [16].

128-NEA3 is based on 128-bit ZUC (see TS 35.221 [18]).

Full details of the algorithms are specified in Annex D.


5.11.1.2 Integrity algorithm identifier values

All identifiers and names specified in the present sub-clause are for 5G
NAS and New Radio. In relation to AS capabilities, the identifiers and
names for E-UTRAN connected to 5GC are specified in TS 33.401 [10].

Each integrity algorithm used for 5G will be assigned a 4-bit identifier.
The following values for integrity algorithms are defined:

"00002"         NIA0       Null Integrity Protection algorithm;

"00012"         128-NIA1   128-bit SNOW 3G based algorithm;

"00102"         128-NIA2   128-bit AES based algorithm; and

"00112"         128-NIA3   128-bit ZUC based algorithm.

128-NIA1 is based on SNOW 3G (see TS 35.215 [14]).

128-NIA2 is based on 128-bit AES [15] in CMAC mode [17].

128-NIA3 is based on 128-bit ZUC (see TS 35.221 [18]).

Full details of the algorithms are specified in Annex D.


5.11.2 Requirements for algorithm selection

a) UE in RRC_Connected and a serving network shall have agreed upon
algorithms for

-  Ciphering and integrity protection of RRC signalling and user plane (to
be used between UE and gNB)

-  Ciphering and integrity protection of RRC signalling and  user plane (to
be used between UE and ng-eNB)

-  NAS ciphering and NAS integrity protection (to be used between UE and
AMF)

b) The serving network shall select the algorithms to use dependent on

-  the UE security capabilities of the UE,

-  the configured allowed list of security capabilities of the currently
serving network entity

c) The UE security capabilities shall include NR NAS algorithms for NAS
level, NR AS algorithms for AS layer and LTE algorithms for AS level if the
UE supports E-UTRAN connected to 5GC.

NOTE:  If the UE supports both E-UTRAN and NR connected to 5GC, the UE 5G
security capabilities include both the LTE and NR algorithms.

d) Each selected algorithm shall be indicated to a UE in a protected manner
such that a UE is ensured that the integrity of algorithm selection is
protected against manipulation.

e) The UE security capabilities shall be protected against "bidding down
attacks".

f) It shall be possible that the selected AS and NAS algorithms are
different at a given point of time.


5.12 Requirements on 5G-RG

The 5G-RG shall be equipped with UICC where the subscription credentials
resides. If provisioned by the home operator, the 5G-RG shall store the
Home Network Public Key required for concealing the SUPI in the UICC.

The 5G-RG shall support all the security requirements and features of the
UE defined in clause 5.2.


5.13 Requirements on NSSAAF

The Network slice specific and SNPN authentication and authorization
function (NSSAAF) shall handle the Network Slice Specific Authentication
requests from the serving AMF as specified in clause 16.The NSSAAF shall
also support functionality for access to SNPN using credentials from
Credentials Holder using AAA Server as specified in clauseI.2.2.2.

The NSSAAF is responsible to send the NSSAA requests to the appropriate AAA-
S.

The NSSAAF shall support AAA-S triggered Network Slice-Specific Re-
authentication and Re-authorization and Slice-Specific Authorization
Revocation and translate any AAA protocol into a Service Based format.

NSSAAF shall translate the Service based messages from the serving AMF or
AUSF to AAA protocols towards AAA-P/AAA-S.


6  Security procedures between UE and 5G network functions


6.0  General

When the UE is capable of connecting to 5GC and EPC and connected to an ng-
eNB which is connected to both EPC and 5GC, the UE has the ability to
select which core network to connect to as described in clause 4.8.4 in
TS24.501[35]. If the UE selects the EPC, the UE shall use security
procedure as in TS33.401[10]. Otherwise, if the UE selects 5GC, the UE
shall use the security procedures as per this document.

For an ng-eNB which can connect to EPC and 5GC, the ng-eNB shall choose the
corresponding security procedures based on the UE selected type of core
netowrk, i.e., when EPC is selected, the ng-eNB shall use security
procedures as described in TS33.401[10]. On the other hand, when 5GC is
selected, the ng-eNB shall use security procedures as described in this
document.


6.1  Primary authentication and key agreement


6.1.1  Authentication framework


6.1.1.1  General

The purpose of the primary authentication and key agreement procedures is
to enable mutual authentication between the UE and the network and provide
keying material that can be used between the UE and the serving network in
subsequent security procedures. The keying material generated by the
primary authentication and key agreement procedure results in an anchor key
called the KSEAF provided by the AUSF of the home network to the SEAF of
the serving network.

Keys for more than one security context can be derived from the KSEAF
without the need of a new authentication run. A concrete example of this is
that an authentication run over a 3GPP access network can also provide keys
to establish security between the UE and a N3IWF used in untrusted non-3GPP
access.

The anchor key KSEAF  is derived from an intermediate key called the KAUSF.
The KAUSF is established between the UE and HN resulting from the primary
authentication procedure. The KAUSF may be securely stored in the AUSF
based on the home operator's policy on using such key e.g. if the control
plane solution for Steering of Roaming (see clause 6.14) or UE Parameter
Update procedures (see clause 6.15) or AKMA are supported by the HPLMN.

NOTE A: For standalone non-public networks when an authentication method
other than 5G AKA or EAP-AKA' is used, Annex I.2 applies.

NOTE 1:  This feature is an optimization that might be useful, for example,
when a UE registers to different serving networks for 3GPP-defined access
and untrusted non-3GPP access (this is possible according to TS 23.501
[2]). The details of this feature are operator-specific and not in scope of
this document.

NOTE 2:  A subsequent authentication based on the KAUSF stored in the AUSF
gives somewhat weaker guarantees than an authentication directly involving
the ARPF and the USIM. It is rather comparable to fast re-authentication in
EAP-AKA'.

NOTE 2a: Void.

UE and serving network shall support EAP-AKA' and 5G AKA authentication
methods.

NOTE 2b: It is the home operator's decision which authentication method is
selected.

The USIM shall reside on a UICC. The UICC may be removable or non-
removable.

NOTE 3:  For non-3GPP access networks USIM applies in case of terminal with
3GPP access capabilities.

If the terminal supports 3GPP access capabilities, the credentials used
with EAP-AKA' and 5G AKA for non-3GPP access networks shall reside on the
UICC.

NOTE 4:  EAP-AKA' and 5G AKA are the only authentication methods that are
supported in UE and serving network, hence only they are described in sub-
clause 6.1.3 of the present document. For a private network using the 5G
system as specified in [7] an example of how additional authentication
methods can be used with the EAP framework is given in the informative
Annex B.

NOTE 5: For non-public network (NPN) security the Annex I of the present
document provides details.

Upon successful completion of the 5G AKA primary authentication, the AMF
shall initiate NAS security mode command procedure (see clause 6.7.2) with
the UE.

NOTE 6: The reason to mandatory run the NAS SMC procedure after primary
authentication is because the UE does not store the new derived KAUSF until
receiving the NAS SMC message. The new partial native NAS security context
is taken into use. It is specified in clause 6.9.4.4 whether AS key re-
keying is performed.


6.1.1.2  EAP framework

The EAP framework is specified in RFC 3748 [27]. It defines the following
roles: peer, pass-through authenticator and back-end authentication server.
The back-end authentication server acts as the EAP server, which terminates
the EAP authentication method with the peer. In the 5G system,  the EAP
framework is supported in the following way:

-  The UE takes the role of the peer.

-  The SEAF takes the role of pass-through authenticator.

-  The AUSF takes the role of the backend authentication server.


6.1.1.3  Granularity of anchor key binding to serving network

The primary authentication and key agreement procedures shall bind the
KSEAF to the serving network. The binding to the serving network prevents
one serving network from claiming to be a different serving network, and
thus provides implicit serving network authentication to the UE.

This implicit serving network authentication shall be provided to the UE
irrespective of the access network technology, so it applies to both 3GPP
and non-3GPP access networks.

Furthermore, the anchor key provided to the serving network shall also be
specific to the authentication having taken place between the UE and a 5G
core network, i.e. the KSEAF shall be cryptographically separate from the
key KASME delivered from the home network to the serving network in earlier
mobile network generations.

The anchor key binding shall be achieved by including a parameter called
"serving network name" into the chain of key derivations that leads from
the long-term subscriber key to the anchor key.

The value of serving network name is defined in sub-clause 6.1.1.4 of the
present document.

The chain of key derivations that leads from the long-term subscriber key
to the anchor key is specified in sub-clause 6.1.3 of the present document
for each (class) of authentication methods. The key derivation rules are
specified in Annex A.

NOTE:  No parameter like 'access network type' is used for anchor key
binding as 5G core procedures are supposed to be access network agnostic.


6.1.1.4  Construction of the serving network name


6.1.1.4.1   Serving network name

The serving network name is used in the derivation of the anchor key. It
serves a dual purpose, namely:

-  It binds the anchor key to the serving network by including the serving
network identifier (SN Id).

-  It makes sure that the anchor key is specific for authentication between
a 5G core network and a UE by including a service code set to "5G".

In 5G AKA, the serving network name has a similar purpose of binding the
RES* and XRES* to the serving network.

The serving network name is the concatenation of a service code and the SN
Id with a separation character ":" such that the service code prepends the
SN Id.

NOTE:  No parameter like 'access network type' is used for serving network
name as it relates to a 5G core procedure that is access network agnostic.

The SN Id identifies the serving PLMN and, except for standalone non-public
networks, is defined as SNN-network-identifier in TS 24.501[35].

NOTE 1: For standalone non-public networks, the definition of SN Id is
given in Annex I.3.


6.1.1.4.2   Construction of the serving network name by the UE

The UE shall construct the serving network name as follows:

-  It shall set the service code to "5G".

-  It shall set the network identifier to the SN Id of the network that it
is authenticating to.

-  Concatenate the service code and the SN Id with the separation character
":".


6.1.1.4.3   Construction of the serving network name by the SEAF

The SEAF shall construct the serving network name as follows:

-  It shall set the service code to "5G".

-  It shall set the network identifier to the SN Id of the serving network
to which the authentication data is sent by the AUSF.

-  It shall concatenate the service code and the SN Id with the separation
character ":".

NOTE:  AUSF gets the serving network name from the SEAF. Before using the
serving network name, AUSF checks that the SEAF is authorized to use it, as
specified in clause 6.1.2.


6.1.2  Initiation of authentication and selection of authentication method

The initiation of the primary authentication is shown in Figure 6.1.2-1.

[pic]

Figure 6.1.2-1: Initiation of authentication procedure and selection of
authentication method

The SEAF may initiate an authentication with the UE during any procedure
establishing a signalling connection with the UE, according to the SEAF's
policy. The UE shall use SUCI or 5G-GUTI in the Registration Request.

The SEAF shall invoke the Nausf_UEAuthentication service by sending a
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message to the AUSF whenever
the SEAF wishes to initiate an authentication.

The Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message shall contain
either:

-  SUCI, as defined in the current specification, or

-  SUPI, as defined in TS 23.501 [2].

The SEAF shall include the SUPI in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Request message in case the SEAF has a valid 5G-GUTI and re-authenticates
the UE. Otherwise the SUCI is included in
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request. SUPI/SUCI structure is part of
stage 3 protocol design.

The Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request shall furthermore contain:

-  the serving network name, as defined in sub-clause 6.1.1.4 of the
present document.

NOTE 2:  The local policy for the selection of the authentication method
does not need to be on a per-UE basis, but can be the same for all UEs.

The Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request may furthermore contain:

-  Disaster Roaming service indication, as specified in TS23.502[8]
clause4.2.2.2.

Upon receiving the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message, the
AUSF shall check that the requesting SEAF in the serving network is
entitled to use the serving network name in the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request by comparing the serving
network name with the expected serving network name. The AUSF shall store
the received serving network name temporarily. If the serving network is
not authorized to use the serving network name, the AUSF shall respond with
"serving network not authorized" in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response.

NOTE2:  The AUSF and the UDM may be configured with Disaster Condition via
OAM based on operator policy and the request by the government agencies.

For the Disaster Roaming, the AUSF shall check the local configuration and,
if allowed, the AUSF sends Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request to the UDM.

The Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request sent from AUSF to UDM includes the
following information:

-  SUCI or SUPI;

-  the serving network name;

-  if received from SEAF, Disaster Roaming service indication;

Upon reception of the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request, the UDM shall
invoke SIDF if a SUCI is received. SIDF shall de-conceal SUCI to gain SUPI
before UDM can process the request.

Based on SUPI, the UDM/ARPF shall choose the authentication method.

NOTE 3:  The Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response in reply to the
Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request and the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message in reply to the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message are described as part
of the authentication procedures in clause 6.1.3.

For the Disaster Roaming, the UDM shall check the local configuration and,
if allowed, the UDM proceeds with the chosen authentication method.


6.1.3  Authentication procedures


6.1.3.1  Authentication procedure for EAP-AKA'

EAP-AKA' is specified in RFC 5448 [12]. The 3GPP 5G profile for EAP-AKA' is
specified in the normative Annex F.

The selection of using EAP-AKA' is described in sub-clause 6.1.2 of the
present document.



[pic]

Figure 6.1.3.1-1: Authentication procedure for EAP-AKA'

The authentication procedure for EAP-AKA' works as follows, cf. also Figure
6.1.3.1-1:

1. The UDM/ARPF shall first generate an authentication vector with
Authentication Management Field (AMF) separation bit = 1 as defined in TS
33.102 [9]. The UDM/ARPF shall then compute CK' and IK' as per the
normative Annex A and replace CK and IK by CK' and IK'.

2. The UDM shall subsequently send this transformed authentication vector
AV' (RAND, AUTN, XRES, CK', IK') to the AUSF from which it received the
Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request together with an indication that the AV'
is to be used for EAP-AKA' using a Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response
message.

NOTE:  The exchange of a Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request message and an
Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response message between the AUSF and the
UDM/ARPF described in the preceding paragraph is the same as for trusted
access using EAP-AKA' described in TS 33.402 [11], sub-clause 6.2, step 10,
except for the input parameter to the key derivation, which is the value of
<network name>. The "network name" is a concept from RFC 5448 [12]; it is
carried in the AT_KDF_INPUT attribute in EAP-AKA'. The value of <network
name> parameter is not defined in RFC 5448 [12], but rather in 3GPP
specifications. For EPS, it is defined as "access network identity" in TS
24.302 [71], and for 5G, it is defined as "serving network name" in sub-
clause 6.1.1.4 of the present document.

In case SUCI was included in the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request, UDM
will include the SUPI in the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response.

If a subscriber has an AKMA subscription, the UDM shall include the AKMA
indication and Routing indicator in the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response.

3. The AUSF shall send the EAP-Request/AKA'-Challenge message to the SEAF
in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message.

4. The SEAF shall transparently forward the EAP-Request/AKA'-Challenge
message to the UE in a NAS message Authentication Request message. The ME
shall forward the RAND and AUTN received in EAP-Request/AKA'-Challenge
message to the USIM. This message shall include the ngKSI and ABBA
parameter. In fact, SEAF shall include the ngKSI and ABBA parameter in all
EAP-Authentication request message. The ngKSI will be used by the UE and
AMF to identify the partial native security context that is created if the
authentication is successful. The SEAF shall set the ABBA parameter as
defined in Annex A.7.1. During an EAP authentication, the value of the
ngKSI and the ABBA parameter sent by the SEAF to the UE shall not be
changed.

NOTE 1:  The SEAF needs to understand that the authentication method used
is an EAP method by evaluating the type of authentication method based on
the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message.

5. At receipt of the RAND and AUTN, the USIM shall verify the freshness of
the AV' by checking whether AUTN can be accepted as described in TS 33.102
[9]. If so, the USIM computes a response RES. The USIM shall return RES,
CK, IK to the ME. If the USIM computes a Kc (i.e. GPRS Kc) from CK and IK
using conversion function c3 as described in TS 33.102 [9], and sends it to
the ME, then the ME shall ignore such GPRS Kc and not store the GPRS Kc on
USIM or in ME. The ME shall derive CK' and IK' according to Annex A.3.

   If the verification of the AUTN fails on the USIM, then the USIM and ME
shall proceed as described in sub-clause 6.1.3. 3.

6. The UE shall send the EAP-Response/AKA'-Challenge message to the SEAF in
a NAS message Auth-Resp message.

7. The SEAF shall transparently forward the EAP-Response/AKA'-Challenge
message to the AUSF in Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message.


8. The AUSF shall verify the message by comparing the XRES and RES, and if
the AUSF has successfully verified this message it shall continue as
follows, otherwise it shall return an error to the SEAF. AUSF shall inform
UDM about the authentication result (see sub-clause 6.1.4 of the present
document for details on linking authentication confirmation).

9. The AUSF and the UE may exchange EAP-Request/AKA'-Notification and EAP-
Response /AKA'-Notification messages via the SEAF. The SEAF shall
transparently forward these messages.

NOTE 2:  EAP Notifications as described in RFC 3748 [27] and EAP-AKA
Notifications as described in RFC 4187 [21] can be used at any time in the
EAP-AKA exchange. These notifications can be used e.g. for protected result
indications or when the EAP server detects an error in the received EAP-AKA
response.

10.  The AUSF derives EMSK from CK and IK as described in RFC 5448[12]
and Annex F. The AUSF uses the most significant 256 bits of EMSK as the
KAUSF and then calculates KSEAF from KAUSF as described in clause A.6. The
AUSF shall send an EAP Success message to the SEAF inside
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response, which shall forward it
transparently to the UE. Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response
message contains the KSEAF. If the AUSF received a SUCI from the SEAF when
the authentication was initiated (see sub-clause 6.1.2 of the present
document), then the AUSF shall also include the SUPI in the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message. The AUSF stores the
KAUSF based on the home network operator's policy according to clause
6.1.1.1.

NOTE 3:  For lawful interception, the AUSF sending SUPI to SEAF is
necessary but not sufficient. By including the SUPI as input parameter to
the key derivation of KAMF from KSEAF, additional assurance on the
correctness of SUPI is achieved by the serving network from both, home
network and UE side.

11.  The SEAF shall send the EAP Success message to the UE in the N1
message. This message shall also include the ngKSI and the ABBA parameter.
The SEAF shall set the ABBA parameter as defined in Annex A.7.1.

NOTE 4:  Step 11 could be NAS Security Mode Command or Authentication
Result.

NOTE 5:  The ABBA parameter is included to enable the bidding down
protection of security features that may be introduced later.

The key received in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response
message shall become the anchor key, KSEAF in the sense of the key
hierarchy in sub-clause 6.2 of the present document. The SEAF shall then
derive the KAMF from the KSEAF, the ABBA parameter and the SUPI according
to Annex A.7 and send it to the AMF. On receiving the EAP-Success message,
the UE derives EMSK from CK and IK as described in RFC 5448 and Annex F.
The ME uses the most significant 256 bits of the EMSK as the KAUSF and then
calculates KSEAF in the same way as the AUSF. The UE shall derive the KAMF
from the KSEAF, the ABBA parameter and the SUPI according to Annex A.7.

NOTE 6:  As an implementation option, the UE creates the temporary security
context as described in step 11 after receiving the EAP message that allows
EMSK to be calculated. The UE turns this temporary security context into a
partial security context when it receives the EAP Success. The UE removes
the temporary security context if the EAP authentication fails.

The further steps taken by the AUSF upon receiving a successfully verified
EAP-Response/AKA'-Challenge message are described in sub-clause 6.1.4 of
the present document.

If the EAP-Response/AKA'-Challenge message is not successfully verified,
the subsequent AUSF behaviour is determined according to the home network's
policy.

If AUSF and SEAF determine that the authentication was successful, then the
SEAF provides the ngKSI and the KAMF to the AMF.


6.1.3.2  Authentication procedure for 5G AKA


6.1.3.2.0   5G AKA

5G AKA enhances EPS AKA [10] by providing the home network with proof of
successful authentication of the UE from the visited network. The proof is
sent by the visited network in an Authentication Confirmation message.

The selection of using 5G AKA is described in sub-clause 6.1.2 of the
present document.

NOTE 1:  5G AKA does not support requesting multiple 5G AVs, neither the
SEAF pre-fetching 5G AVs from the home network for future use.



[pic]

Figure 6.1.3.2-1: Authentication procedure for 5G AKA

The authentication procedure for 5G AKA works as follows, cf. also Figure
6.1.3.2-1:

1. For each Nudm_Authenticate_Get Request, the UDM/ARPF shall create a 5G
HE AV. The UDM/ARPF does this by generating an AV with the Authentication
Management Field (AMF) separation bit set to "1" as defined in TS 33.102
[9]. The UDM/ARPF shall then derive KAUSF (as per Annex A.2) and calculate
XRES* (as per Annex A.4). Finally, the UDM/ARPF shall create a 5G HE AV
from RAND, AUTN, XRES*, and KAUSF.

2. The UDM shall then return the 5G HE AV to the AUSF together with an
indication that the 5G HE AV is to be used for 5G AKA in a
Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response. In case SUCI was included in the
Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request, UDM will include the SUPI in the
Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response after deconcealment of SUCI by SIDF.

If a subscriber has an AKMA subscription, the UDM shall include the AKMA
indication and Routing indicator in the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response.

3. The AUSF shall store the XRES* temporarily together with the received
SUCI or SUPI.

4. The AUSF shall then generate the 5G AV from the 5G HE AV received from
the UDM/ARPF by computing the HXRES* from XRES* (according to Annex A.5)
and KSEAF from KAUSF (according to Annex A.6), and replacing the XRES* with
the HXRES* and KAUSF with KSEAF in the 5G HE AV.

5. The AUSF shall then remove the KSEAF and return the 5G SE AV (RAND,
AUTN, HXRES*) to the SEAF in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response.

6. The SEAF shall send RAND, AUTN to the UE in a NAS message Authentication
Request. This message shall also include the ngKSI that will be used by the
UE and AMF to identify the KAMF and the partial native security context
that is created if the authentication is successful. This message shall
also include the ABBA parameter. The SEAF shall set the ABBA parameter as
defined in Annex A.7.1. The ME shall forward the RAND and AUTN received in
NAS message Authentication Request to the USIM.

NOTE 2: The ABBA parameter is included to enable the bidding down
protection of security features.

7. At receipt of the RAND and AUTN, the USIM shall verify the freshness of
the received values by checking whether AUTN can be accepted as described
in TS 33.102[9]. If so, the USIM computes a response RES. The USIM shall
return RES, CK, IK to the ME. If the USIM computes a Kc (i.e. GPRS Kc) from
CK and IK using conversion function c3 as described in TS 33.102 [9], and
sends it to the ME, then the ME shall ignore such GPRS Kc and not store the
GPRS Kc on USIM or in ME. The ME then shall compute RES* from RES according
to Annex A.4. The ME shall calculate KAUSF from CK||IK according to clause
A.2. The ME shall calculate KSEAF from KAUSF according to clause A.6. An ME
accessing 5G shall check during authentication that the "separation bit" in
the AMF field of AUTN is set to 1. The "separation bit" is bit 0 of the AMF
field of AUTN.

NOTE 3:  This separation bit in the AMF field of AUTN cannot be used
anymore for operator specific purposes as described by TS 33.102 [9], Annex
F.

  8. The UE shall return RES* to the SEAF in a NAS message Authentication
  Response.

9. The SEAF shall then compute HRES* from RES* according to Annex A.5, and
the SEAF shall compare HRES* and HXRES*. If they coincide, the SEAF shall
consider the authentication successful from the serving network point of
view. If not, the SEAF proceed as described in sub-clause 6.1.3.2.2. If the
UE is not reached, and the RES* is never received by the SEAF, the SEAF
shall consider authentication as failed, and indicate a failure to the
AUSF.

10.  The SEAF shall send RES*, as received from the UE, in a
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message to the AUSF.

11.  When the AUSF receives as authentication confirmation the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message including a RES* it may
verify whether the 5G AV has expired. If the 5G AV has expired, the AUSF
may consider the authentication as unsuccessful from the home network point
of view. Upon successful authentication, the AUSF stores the KAUSF based on
the home network operator's policy according to clause 6.1.1.1. AUSF shall
compare the received RES* with the stored XRES*. If the RES* and XRES* are
equal, the AUSF shall consider the authentication as successful from the
home network point of view. AUSF shall inform UDM about the authentication
result (see sub-clause 6.1.4 of the present document for linking with the
authentication confirmation).

NOTE 4: It is left to implementation to temporarily store the KAUSF
received in step 2 in AUSF until the RES* verification is done successfully
(i.e., at step 11).

12.  The AUSF shall indicate to the SEAF in the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response whether the authentication was
successful or not from the home network point of view. If the
authentication was successful, the KSEAF shall be sent to the SEAF in the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response. In case the AUSF received a
SUCI from the SEAF in the authentication request (see sub-clause 6.1.2 of
the present document), and if the authentication was successful, then the
AUSF shall also include the SUPI in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response message.

If the authentication was successful, the key KSEAF received in the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message shall become the
anchor key in the sense of the key hierarchy as specified in sub-clause 6.2
of the present document. Then the SEAF shall derive the KAMF from the
KSEAF, the ABBA parameter and the SUPI according to Annex A.7. The SEAF
shall provide the ngKSI and the KAMF to the AMF. If the AUSF indicates that
the authentication was successful from the home network point of view, then
the AMF shall initiate NAS security mode command procedure (see clause
6.7.2) with the UE, to take the newly generated partial native 5G NAS
security context into use. Upon receiving the valid NAS Security Mode
Command message from the AMF, the UE shall consider the performed primary
authentication as successful.

If a SUCI was used for this authentication, then the SEAF shall only
provide ngKSI and KAMF to the AMF after it has received the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message containing KSEAF and
SUPI; no communication services will be provided to the UE until the SUPI
is known to the serving network.

The further steps taken by the AUSF after the authentication procedure are
described in sub-clause 6.1.4 of the present document.


6.1.3.2.1   Void


6.1.3.2.2   RES* verification failure in SEAF or AUSF or both

This clause describes how RES* verification failure in the SEAF or in the
AUSF shall be handled.

In step 9 in Figure 6.1.3.2-1, the SEAF shall compute HRES* from RES*
according to Annex A.5, and the SEAF shall compare HRES* and HXRES*. If
they dont coincide, then the SEAF shall consider the authentication as
unsuccessful.

The SEAF shall proceed with step 10 in Figure 6.1.3.2-1 and after receiving
the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message from the AUSF in
step 12in Figure 6.1.3.2-1, proceed as described below:

-  If the AUSF has indicated in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response message to the SEAF that the verification of the RES* was not
successful in the AUSF, or

-  if the verification of the RES* was not successful in the SEAF,

then the SEAF shall either reject the authentication by sending an
Authentication Reject to the UE if the SUCI was used by the UE in the
initial NAS message or the SEAF/AMF shall initiate an Identification
procedure with the UE if the 5G-GUTI was used by the UE in the initial NAS
message to retrieve the SUCI and an additional authentication attempt may
be initiated.

Also, if the SEAF does not receive any Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response  message from the AUSF as expected, then the SEAF shall either
reject the authentication to the UE or initiate an Identification procedure
with the UE.


6.1.3.3  Synchronization failure or MAC failure


6.1.3.3.1   Synchronization failure or MAC failure in USIM

This clause describes synchronisation failure or MAC failure in USIM.

In step 7 in Figure 6.1.3.2-1 when 5G AKA is used; or in step 5 in Figure
6.1.3.1-1 when EAP-AKA is used, at the receipt of the RAND and AUTN, if
the verification of the AUTN fails, then the USIM indicates to the ME the
reason for failure and in the case of a synchronisation failure passes the
AUTS parameter (see TS 33.102 [9]) to the ME.

If 5G AKA is used: The ME shall respond with NAS message Authentication
Failure with a CAUSE value indicating the reason for failure. In case of a
synchronisation failure of AUTN (as described in TS 33.102 [9]), the UE
also includes AUTS that was provided by the USIM. Upon receipt of an
authentication failure message, the AMF/SEAF may initiate new
authentication towards the UE. (see TS 24.501 [35]).

If EAP-AKA is used: The ME shall proceed as described in RFC 4187 [21] and
RFC 5448 [12] for EAP-AKA.


6.1.3.3.2   Synchronization failure recovery in Home Network

Upon receiving an authentication failure message with synchronisation
failure (AUTS) from the UE, the SEAF sends an
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message with a "synchronisation
failure indication" to the AUSF and the AUSF sends an
Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request message to the UDM/ARPF, together with
the following parameters:

-  RAND sent to the UE in the preceding Authentication Request, and

-  AUTS received by the SEAF in the response from the UE to that request,
as described in subsection 6.1.3.2.0 and 6.1.3.3.1.

An SEAF will not react to unsolicited "synchronisation failure indication"
messages from the UE.

The SEAF does not send new authentication requests to the UE before having
received the response to its Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request
message with a "synchronisation failure indication" from the AUSF (or
before it is timed out).

When the UDM/ARPF receives an Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request message
with a "synchronisation failure indication" it acts as described in TS
33.102 [9], clause 6.3.5 where ARPF is mapped to HE/AuC. The UDM/ARPF sends
an Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response message with a new authentication
vector for either EAP-AKA or 5G-AKA depending on the authentication method
applicable for the user to the AUSF. The AUSF runs a new authentication
procedure with the UE according to clauses 6.1.3.1 or 6.1.3.2 depending on
the authentication method applicable for the user.


6.1.4  Linking increased home control to subsequent procedures


6.1.4.1  Introduction

The 5G authentication and key agreement protocols provide increased home
control. Compared to EPS AKA in EPS, this provides better security useful
in preventing certain types of fraud as explained in more detail below.

This increased home control comes in the following forms in 5GS:

-  In the case of EAP-AKA', the AUSF in the home network obtains
confirmation that the UE has been successfully authenticated when the EAP-
Response/AKA'-Challenge received by the AUSF has been successfully
verified, cf. sub-clause 6.1.3.1 of the present document.

-  In the case of 5G AKA, the AUSF in the home network obtains confirmation
that the UE has been successfully authenticated when the authentication
confirmation received by the AUSF in Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Request message has been successfully verified, cf. sub-clause 6.1.3.2 of
the present document.

When 3GPP credentials are used in above cases, the result is reported to
the UDM. Details are described in clause 6.1.4.1a.

The feature of increased home control is useful in preventing certain types
of fraud, e.g. fraudulent Nudm_UECM_Registration Request for registering
the subscriber's serving AMF in UDM that are not actually present in the
visited network. But an authentication protocol by itself cannot provide
protection against such fraud. The authentication result needs to be linked
to subsequent procedures, e.g. the Nudm_UECM_Registration procedure from
the AMF in some way to achieve the desired protection.

The actions taken by the home network to link authentication confirmation
(or the lack thereof) to subsequent procedures are subject to operator
policy and are not standardized.

But informative guidance is given in sub-clause 6.1.4.2 as to what measures
an operator could usefully take. Such guidance may help avoiding a
proliferation of different solutions.

The feature of increased home control is also used to allow the UDM to keep
track of the AUSF that stores the KAUSF to be used during e.g. the control
plane solution for Steering of Roaming or UE Parameter Update procedures;
i.e. the AUSF that stores the latest KAUSF generated after successful
completion of the latest primary authentication reported to the UDM.

After the UDM is informed that the UE has been successfully (re-
)authenticated, the UDM shall store the AUSF instance which reported the
successful authentication. If the UDM has been previously informed that the
UE was authenticated by a different AUSF instance, the UDM may request the
old AUSF to clear the stale security parameters (KAUSF, SOR counter and UE
parameter update counter). If the UDM determines to delete the security
parameters in the old AUSF, then the UDM shall use the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_deregister service operation (see clause 14.1.5).


6.1.4.1a Linking authentication confirmation to Nudm_UECM_Registration
         procedure from AMF

The information sent from the AUSF to the UDM that a successful or
unsuccessful authentication of a subscriber has occurred, shall be used to
link authentication confirmation to subsequent procedures. The AUSF shall
send the Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation service operation for
this purpose as shown in figure6.1.4.1a-1.

[pic]

Figure 6.1.4.1a-1: Linking increased Home control to subsequent procedures

1. The AUSF shall inform UDM about the result and time of an authentication
procedure with a UE using a Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation
Request. This shall include the SUPI, a timestamp of the authentication,
the authentication type (e.g. EAP method or 5G-AKA), and the serving
network name.

NOTE:  It may be sufficient for the purposes of fraud prevention to send
only information about successful authentications, but this is up to
operator policy.

2. The UDM shall store the authentication status of the UE (SUPI,
authentication result, timestamp, and the serving network name).

3. UDM shall reply to AUSF with a Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation
Response.

4. Upon reception of subsequent UE related procedures (e.g.
Nudm_UECM_Registration_Request from AMF) UDM may apply actions according to
home operators policy to detect and achieve protection against certain
types of fraud (e.g. as proposed in section 6.1.4.2).


6.1.4.2  Guidance on linking authentication confirmation to
         Nudm_UECM_Registration procedure from AMF

This sub-clause gives informative guidance on how a home operator could
link authentication confirmation (or the lack thereof) to subsequent
Nudm_UECM_Registration procedures from AMF to achieve protection against
certain types of fraud, as mentioned in the preceding sub-clause.

Approach 1:

The home network records the time of the most recent successfully verified
authentication confirmation of the subscriber together with the identity of
the 5G visited network that was involved in the authentication. When a new
Nudm_UECM_Registration Request arrives from a visited network, the home
network checks whether there is a sufficiently recent authentication of the
subscriber by this visited network. If not, the Nudm_UECM_Registration
Request is rejected. The rejection message may include, according to the
home networks policy, an indication that the visited network should send a
new Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request (cf. sub-clause 6.1.2 of
the present document) for fetching a new authentication vector before
repeating the Nudm_UECM_Registration Request.

NOTE 1:  With this approach, the authentication procedure and the
Nudm_UECM_Registration procedure are performed independently. They are
coupled only through linking information in the home network.

NOTE 2:  It is up to the home network to set the time threshold to define
what 'sufficiently recent' is.

Approach 2:

As a variant of the above Approach 1, Approach 2 is based on a more fine-
grained policy applied by the home network; the home network could classify
roaming partners into different categories, depending on the trust - e.g.
derived from previous experience placed in them, for example as follows:

-  For a visited network in the first category, the home network would
require a successful authentication 'immediately preceding' the
Nudm_UECM_Registration Request from an AMF.

-  For a visited network in the second category, the home network would
only check that an authentication in a network visited by the subscriber
was sufficiently recent (taking into account that there may have been a
security context transfer between the visited networks).

-  For a visited network in the third category, the home network would
perform no checks regarding Nudm_UECM_Registration Requests and
authentication at all.

Further approaches are possible, depending on the home operator's policy.


6.2  Key hierarchy, key derivation, and distribution scheme


6.2.1  Key hierarchy

Requirements on 5GC and NG-RAN related to keys are described in clause
5.1.3. The following describes the keys of the key hierarchy generation in
a 5GS in detail.:

[pic]

Figure 6.2.1-1: Key hierarchy generation in 5GS



The keys related to authentication (see Figure 6.2.1-1) include the
following keys: K, CK/IK. In case of EAP-AKA', the keys CK', IK' are
derived from CK, IK as specified in clause 6.1.3.1.

The key hierarchy (see Figure 6.2.1-1) includes the following keys: KAUSF,
KSEAF, KAMF, KNASint, KNASenc, KN3IWF, KgNB, KRRCint, KRRCenc, KUPint and
KUPenc.

Keys for AUSF in home network:

-  KAUSF is a key derived

-  by ME and AUSF from CK', IK' in case of EAP-AKA', CK' and IK' is
received by AUSF as a part of transformed AV from ARPF; or,

-  by ME and ARPF from CK, IK in case of 5G AKA, KAUSF is received by AUSF
as a part of the 5G HE AV from ARPF.

-  KSEAF is an anchor key derived by ME and AUSF from KAUSF.  KSEAF is
provided by AUSF to the SEAF in the serving network.

Key for AMF in serving network:

-  KAMF is a key derived by ME and SEAF from KSEAF. KAMF is further derived
by ME and source AMF when performing horizontal key derivation.

Keys for NAS signalling:

-  KNASint is a key derived by ME and AMF from KAMF, which shall only be
used for the protection of NAS signalling with a particular integrity
algorithm.

-  KNASenc is a key derived by ME and AMF from KAMF, which shall only be
used for the protection of NAS signalling with a particular encryption
algorithm.

Key for NG-RAN:

-  KgNB is a key derived by ME and AMF from KAMF. KgNB is further derived
by ME and source gNB when performing horizontal or vertical key derivation.
The KgNB is used as KeNB between ME and ng-eNB.

Keys for UP traffic:

-  KUPenc is a key derived by ME and gNB from KgNB, which shall only be
used for the protection of UP traffic with a particular encryption
algorithm.

-  KUPint is a key derived by ME and gNB from KgNB, which shall only be
used for the protection of UP traffic between ME and gNB with a particular
integrity algorithm.

Keys for RRC signalling:

-  KRRCint is a key derived by ME and gNB from KgNB, which shall only be
used for the protection of RRC signalling with a particular integrity
algorithm.

-  KRRCenc is a key derived by ME and gNB from KgNB, which shall only be
used for the protection of RRC signalling with a particular encryption
algorithm.

Intermediate keys:

-  NH is a key derived by ME and AMF to provide forward security as
described in Clause A.10.

-  KNG-RAN * is a key derived by ME and NG-RAN (i.e., gNB or ng-eNB) when
performing a horizontal or vertical key derivation as specified in Clause
6.9. 2.1.1 using a KDF as specified in Clause A.11/A.12.

-  KAMF' is a key that can be derived by ME and AMF when the UE moves from
one AMF to another during inter-AMF mobility as specified in Clause 6.9.3
using a KDF as specified in Annex A.13.

Key for the non-3GPP access:

-  KN3IWF is a key derived by ME and AMF from KAMF for the non-3GPP access.
KN3IWF is not forwarded between N3IWFs.

NOTE 1: The key hierarchy for standalone non-public networks when an
authentication method other than 5G AKA or EAP-AKA' is used is given in
Annex I.2.3.


6.2.2  Key derivation and distribution scheme


6.2.2.1  Keys in network entities

Keys in the ARPF

The ARPF shall process the long-term key K and any other sensitive data
only in its secure environment. The key K shall be 128 bits or 256 bits
long.

During an authentication and key agreement procedure, the ARPF shall derive
CK' and IK' from K in case EAP-AKA' is used and derive KAUSF from K in case
5G AKA is used. The ARPF shall forward the derived keys to the AUSF.

The ARPF holds the Home Network Private Key that is used by the SIDF to
deconceal the SUCI and reconstruct the SUPI. The generation and storage of
this key material is out of scope of the present document.

Keys in the AUSF

In case EAP-AKA' is used as authentication method, the AUSF shall derive a
key KAUSF from CK' and IK' for EAP-AKA' as specified in clause 6.1.3.1. In
case that 5G AKA is used as authentication method, the UDM/ARPF shall
generate the KAUSF as specified in clause 6.1.3.2.

The KAUSF may be stored in the AUSF between two subsequent authentication
and key agreement procedures.

When the AUSF stores the KAUSF, the AUSF shall store the latest KAUSF
generated after successful completion of the latest primary authentication.
The authentication is considered as successful and the AUSF shall store the
latest KAUSF or replace the old KAUSF with the new KAUSF (if the AMF(s) end
up selecting the same AUSF instance for (re)authentication of the UE):

- in case 5G AKA is used as authentication method, when the RES* and the
XRES* are equal (see clause 6.1.3.2.0, Step 11).

- in case EAP-AKA' is used as authentication method, when the AUSF sends an
EAP-Success message to the SEAF (see clause 6.1.3.1, Step 10).

The AUSF shall generate the anchor key, also called KSEAF, from the
authentication key material received from the ARPF during an authentication
and key agreement procedure.

Keys in the SEAF

The SEAF receives the anchor key, KSEAF, from the AUSF upon a successful
primary authentication procedure in each serving network.

The SEAF shall never transfer KSEAF to an entity outside the SEAF. Once
KAMF is derived KSEAF shall be deleted.

The SEAF shall generate KAMF from KSEAF immediately following the
authentication and key agreement procedure and hands it to the AMF.

NOTE 1:  This implies that a new KAMF, along with a new KSEAF, is generated
for each run of the authentication and key agreement procedure.

NOTE 2:  The SEAF is co-located with the AMF.

Keys in the AMF

The AMF receives KAMF from the SEAF or from another AMF.

The AMF shall, based on policy, derive a key KAMF' from KAMF for transfer
to another AMF in inter-AMF mobility. The receiving AMF shall use K'AMF as
its key KAMF.

NOTE 3: The precise rules for key handling in inter-AMF mobility can be
found in clause 6.9.3.

The AMF shall generate keys KNASint and KNASenc dedicated to protecting the
NAS layer.

The AMF shall generate access network specific keys from KAMF. In
particular,

-  the AMF shall generate KgNB and transfer it to the gNB.

-  the AMF shall generate NH and transfer it to the gNB, together with the
corresponding NCC value.
The AMF may also transfer an NH key, together with the corresponding NCC
value, to another AMF, cf. clause 6.9.

-  the AMF shall generate KN3IWF and transfer it to the N3IWF when KAMF is
received from SEAF, or when KAMF' is received from another AMF.

Keys in the NG-RAN

The NG-RAN (i.e., gNB or ng-eNB) receives KgNB and NH from the AMF. The ng-
eNB uses KgNB as KeNB.

The NG-RAN (i.e., gNB or ng-eNB) shall generate all further access stratum
(AS) keys from KgNB and /or NH.

Keys in the N3IWF

The N3IWF receives KN3IWF from the AMF.

The N3IWF shall use KN3IWF as the key MSK for IKEv2 between UE and N3IWF in
the procedures for untrusted non-3GPP access, cf. clause 11.

Figure 6.2.2-1 shows the dependencies between the different keys, and how
they are derived from the network nodes point of view.

[pic]

Figure 6.2.2-1: Key distribution and key derivation scheme for 5G for
network nodes

NOTE 4: The key derivation and distribution scheme for standalone non-
public networks, when an authentication method other than 5G AKA or EAP-
AKA' is used, is given in Annex I.2.3.


6.2.2.2  Keys in the UE

For every key in a network entity, there is a corresponding key in the UE.

Figure 6.2.2-2 shows the corresponding relations and derivations as
performed in the UE.

[pic]

Figure 6.2.2-2: Key distribution and key derivation scheme for 5G for the
UE

Keys in the USIM

The USIM shall store the same long-term key K that is stored in the ARPF.

During an authentication and key agreement procedure, the USIM shall
generate key material from K that it forwards to the ME.

If provisioned by the home operator, the USIM shall store the Home Network
Public Key used for concealing the SUPI.

Keys in the ME

The ME shall generate the KAUSF from the CK, IK received from the USIM. The
generation of this key material is specific to the authentication method
and is specified in clause 6.1.3.

When 5G AKA is used, the generation of RES* from RES shall be performed by
the ME.

The UE shall store the latest KAUSF or replace the old KAUSF with the
latest KAUSF, after successful completion of the latest primary
authentication . If the USIM supports 5G parameters storage, KAUSF shall be
stored in the USIM. Otherwise, KAUSF shall be stored in the non-volatile
memory of the ME.

In case 5G AKA is used as an authentication method, upon receiving the
valid NAS Security Mode Command message from the AMF (to take the
corresponding partial context derived from the newly generated KAUSF into
use), the UE shall consider the performed primary authentication as
successful and the UE shall store the newly generated KAUSF as the latest
KAUSF or replace the old KAUSF with the latest KAUSF.

In case of any key generating EAP method in the present document (EAP-AKA',
EAP-TLS in Annex B, EAP methods in Annex I) is used as the authentication
method for the primary (re)authentication, upon receiving the EAP-Success
message, the primary authentication shall be considered as successful and
the UE shall store the newly generated KAUSF as the latest KAUSF or replace
the old KAUSF with the latest KAUSF.

The ME shall perform the generation of KSEAF from the KAUSF. If the USIM
supports 5G parameters storage, KSEAF shall be stored in the USIM.
Otherwise, KSEAF shall be stored in the non-volatile memory of the ME.

The ME shall perform the generation of KAMF. If the USIM supports 5G
parameters storage, KAMF shall be stored in the USIM. Otherwise, KAMF shall
be stored in the non-volatile memory of the ME.

The ME shall perform the generation of all other subsequent keys that are
derived from the KAMF.

Any 5G security context, KAUSF and KSEAF that are stored at the ME shall be
deleted from the ME if:

a) the USIM is removed from the ME when the ME is in power on state;

b) the ME is powered up and the ME discovers that the USIM is different
from the one which was used to create the 5G security context;

c) the ME is powered up and the ME discovers that there is no USIM is
present at the ME.

NOTE 1: The key derivation and distribution scheme for standalone non-
public networks, when an authentication method other than 5G AKA or EAP-
AKA' is used, is given in Annex I.2.3.


6.2.3  Handling of user-related keys


6.2.3.1  Key setting

Key setting happens at the end of successful authentication procedure.
Authentication and key setting may be initiated by the network as often as
the network operator wishes when an active NAS connection exists. Key
setting can occur as soon as the identity of the mobile subscriber (i.e. 5G-
GUTI or SUPI) is known by the AMF. A successful run of 5G AKA or EAP AKA'
results in a new KAMF that is stored in the UE and the AMF with a new
partial, non-current security context.

NAS keys (i.e. KNASint and KNASenc) and AS keys (i.e. KgNB, KRRCenc,
KRRCint, KUPenc, KUPint) are derived from KAMF using the KDFs specified in
Annex A. The NAS keys derived from the new KAMF are taken in use in the AMF
and the UE by means of the NAS security mode command procedure (see sub-
clause 6.7.2). The AS keys are taken into use with the AS security mode
command procedure (see sub-clause 6.7.4) or with the key change on the fly
procedure (see sub-clause 6.9.6).

For the non-3GPP access, the key KN3IWF is derived from the KAMF. KN3IWF is
stored in the UE and the N3IWF as specified in subclause 7.2.1. This key
KN3IWF and the IPsec SA cryptographic keys are taken into use with the
establishment of IPsec Security Association (SA) between the UE and the
N3IWF.

NOTE:  For mapped security contexts, the KAMF is derived from EPS keys
during interworking with EPS (see clause 8).


6.2.3.2  Key identification

The key KAMF shall be identified by the key set identifier ngKSI. ngKSI may
be either of type native or of type mapped. An ngKSI shall be stored in the
UE and the AMF together with KAMF and the temporary identifier 5G-GUTI, if
available.

NOTE 1:  The 5G-GUTI points to the AMF where the KAMF is stored.

A native ngKSI is associated with the KSEAF and KAMF derived during primary
authentication. It is allocated by the SEAF and sent with the
authentication request message to the UE where it is stored together with
the KAMF. The purpose of the ngKSI is to make it possible for the UE and
the AMF to identify a native security context without invoking the
authentication procedure. This is used to allow re-use of the native
security context during subsequent connection set-ups.

A mapped ngKSI is associated with the KAMF derived from EPS keys during
interworking, cf. clause 8 of the present document. It is generated in both
the UE and the AMF respectively when deriving the mapped KAMF when moving
from EPS to 5GS. The mapped ngKSI is stored together with the mapped KAMF.

The purpose of the mapped ngKSI is to make it possible for the UE and the
AMF to indicate the use of the mapped KAMF in interworking procedures (for
details cf. clause 8).

The format of ngKSI shall allow a recipient of such a parameter to
distinguish whether the parameter is of type native or of type mapped. The
format shall contain a type field and a value field. The type field
indicates the type of the key set. The value field consists of three bits
where seven values, excluding the value '111', are used to identify the key
set. The value '111' is reserved to be used by the UE to indicate that a
valid KAMF is not available for use. The format of ngKSI is described in
[35]

KNASenc and KNASint in the key hierarchy specified in clause 6.2.1, which
are derived from KAMF, can be uniquely identified by ngKSI together with
those parameters from the set {algorithm distinguisher, algorithm
identifier}, which are used to derive these keys from KAMF.

The KN3IWF can be uniquely determined by ngKSI together with the uplink NAS
COUNT are used to derive it according to clause A.9.

The initial KgNB can be uniquely determined by ngKSI, together with the
uplink NAS COUNT are used to derive it according to clause A.9.

The intermediate key NH as defined in clause 6.9.2.1.1 can be uniquely
determined by ngKSI, together with the initial KgNB derived from the
current 5G NAS security context for use during the ongoing CM-CONNECTED
state and a counter counting how many NH-derivations have already been
performed from this initial KgNB according to clause A.10. The next hop
chaining counter, NCC, represents the 3 least significant bits of this
counter.

Intermediate key KNG-RAN*, as well as non-initial KgNB, defined in clause
6.9.2.1.1 can be uniquely identified by ngKSI together with those
parameters from the set {KgNB or NH, sequence of PCIs and ARFCN-DLs}, which
are used to derive these keys from KgNB or NH.

KRRCint, KRRCenc, KUPint, and KUPenc in the key hierarchy specified in
clause 6.2.1 can be uniquely identified by ngKSI together with those
parameters from the set {algorithm distinguisher, algorithm identifier},
which are used to derive these keys from KgNB.

NOTE 2:  In addition to 5G security contexts, the UE may also cache EPS
security contexts. These EPS security contexts are identified by the eKSI,
as defined in TS 33.401 [10].


6.2.3.3  Key lifetimes

KAUSF, and KSEAF shall be created when running a successful primary
authentication as described in clause 6.1.3.

KAMF shall be created in the following cases:

1. Primary authentication

2. NAS key re-keying as described in clause 6.9.4.2

3. NAS key refresh as described in clause 6.9.4.3

4. Interworking procedures with EPS (cf. clauses 8 and 10)

In case the UE does not have a valid KAMF, an ngKSI with value "111" shall
be sent by the UE to the network, which can initiate (re)authentication
procedure to get a new KAMF based on a successful primary authentication.

KNASint and KNASenc are derived based on a KAMF when running a successful
NAS SMC procedure as described in clause 6.7.2.

KN3IWF is derived from KAMF and remains valid as long as the UE is
connected to the 5GC over non- 3gpp access or until the UE is
reauthenticated.

KgNB and NH are derived based on KAMF or KgNB or NH in the following cases:

1. Inter-gNB-CU-handover as described in clause 6.9.2.3.1

2. State transitions as described in clause 6.8

3. AS key re-keying as described in clause 6.9.4.4

4. AS key refresh as described in clause 6.9.4.5

The KRRCint, KRRCenc, KUPint and KUPenc are derived based on KgNB after a
new KgNB is derived.


6.3  Security contexts


6.3.1  Distribution of security contexts


6.3.1.1  General

The present clause focuses on the security contexts themselves; the
handling of security contexts in mobility procedures is described in
clause 6.9.


6.3.1.2  Distribution of subscriber identities and security data within one
         5G serving network domain

The transmission of the following subscriber identities and security data
is permitted between 5G core network entities of the same serving network
domain:

-  SUPI in the clear

-  5G security contexts, as described in clause 6.9

A 5G authentication vector shall not be transmitted between SEAFs.

Once the subscriber identities and security data have been transmitted from
an old to a new network entity the old network entity shall delete the
data.


6.3.1.3  Distribution of subscriber identities and security data between 5G
         serving network domains

The transmission of the following subscriber identities and security data
is permitted between 5G core network entities of different serving network
domains:

-  SUPI in the clear

-  5G security contexts, as described in clause 6.9, if the security policy
of the transmitting 5G serving network domain allows this.

A 5G authentication vector or non-current 5G security contexts shall not be
transmitted to a different 5G serving network domain.


6.3.1.4  Distribution of subscriber identities and security data between 5G
         and EPS serving network domains

NOTE 1:  No direct interworking between 5G networks and network of
generations prior to EPS are foreseen. Therefore, only the interaction
between 5G and EPS serving network domains is addressed here.

The transmission of the SUPI in the clear is permitted between 5G and EPS
core network entities if it has the form of an IMSI.

The transmission of any unmodified 5G security contexts to a EPS core
network entity is not permitted. Details of security context transfer
between EPS and 5G core network entities can be found in clause 8.

The transmission of a 5G authentication vector to an EPS core network
entity is not permitted. The transmission of any unused EPS authentication
vectors to a 5G core network entity is not permitted. If SEAF receives any
unused authentication vectors (e.g. in mobility scenarios from legacy MME)
they shall be dropped without any processing.

NOTE 2:  The rules above differ from the corresponding rules in 3GPP TS
33.401, clause 6.1.6: The latter allows forwarding of UMTS authentication
vectors from an SGSN to an MME and back to the same SGSN under certain
conditions. But this feature goes against a strict security separation of
EPS and 5G domains. As its performance advantage is questionable it was not
copied into 5G.

NOTE 3:  Security context mapping between EPS and 5G serving networks is
allowed, according to clause 8.


6.3.2  Multiple registrations in same or different serving networks


6.3.2.0  General

There are two cases where the UE can be multiple registered in different
PLMN's serving networks or in the same PLMN's serving networks. The first
case is when the UE is registered in one PLMN serving network over a
certain type of access (e.g. 3GPP) and is registered to another PLMN
serving network over the other type of access (e.g. non-3GPP). The second
case is where the UE is registered in the same AMF in the same PLMN serving
network over both 3GPP and non-3GPP accesses. The UE will establish two NAS
connections with the network in both cases.

NOTE:  The UE uses the same subscription credential(s) for multiple
registrations in the same or different serving networks.


6.3.2.1  Multiple registrations in different PLMNs

The UE shall independently maintain and use two different 5G security
contexts, one per PLMN's serving network. Each security context shall be
established separately via a successful primary authentication procedure
with the Home PLMN.

The ME shall store the two different 5G security contexts on the USIM if
the USIM supports the 5G parameters storage. If the USIM does not support
the 5G parameters storage, then the ME shall store the two different 5G
security contexts in the ME non-volatile memory. Both of the two different
5G security contexts are current 5G security context.

The latest KAUSF result of the successful completion of the latest primary
authentication shall be used by the UE and the HN regardless over which
access network type (3GPP or non-3GPP) it was generated.

The HN shall keep the latest KAUSF generated during successful
authentication over a given access even if the UE is deregistered from that
access, but the UE is registered via another access.


6.3.2.2  Multiple registrations in the same PLMN

When the UE is registered in the same AMF in the same PLMN serving network
over both 3GPP and non-3GPP accesses, the UE shall establish two NAS
connections with the network. Upon receiving the registration request
message, the AMF should check whether the UE is authenticated by the
network. The AMF may decide to skip a new authentication run in case there
is an available 5G security context for this UE by means of 5G-GUTI, e.g.
when the UE successfully registered to 3GPP access.

If the UE registers to the same AMF via non-3GPP access, the AMF can decide
not to run a new authentication if it has an available security context to
use. In this case, the UE shall directly take into use the available common
5G NAS security context and use it to protect the registration over the non-
3GPP access. If there are stored NAS counts for the non-3GPP access for the
PLMN in the UE, then the stored NAS counts for the non-3GPP access for the
PLMN shall be used to protect the registration over the non-3GPP access.
Otherwise, the common 5G NAS security context is taken into use for the
first time (partial) over non-3GPP access. In this case, the UL NAS COUNT
value and DL NAS COUNT value for the non-3GPP access needs to be set to
zero by the UE before the UE is taking the 5G NAS security context into use
over non 3GPP access.

The AMF and the UE shall establish a common NAS security context consisting
of a single set of NAS keys and algorithm at the time of first registration
over any access. The AMF and the UE shall also store parameters specific to
each NAS connection in the common NAS security context including two pairs
of NAS COUNTs for each access (i.e. 3GPP access and non-3GPP access). The
connection specific parameters are specified in clause 6.4.2.2 of the
present document.


6.4  NAS security mechanisms


6.4.1  General

This sub-clause describes the security mechanisms for the protection of NAS
signalling and data between the UE and the AMF over the N1 reference point.
This protection involves both integrity and confidentiality protection. The
security parameters for NAS protection are part of the 5G security context
described in sub-clause 6.3 of the present document.


6.4.2  Security for multiple NAS connections


6.4.2.1  Multiple active NAS connections with different PLMNs

TS 23.501 [2] has a scenario when the UE is registered to a VPLMN's serving
network via 3GPP access and to another VPLMN's or HPLMN's serving network
via non-3GPP access at the same time. When the UE is registered in one
PLMN's serving network over a certain type of access (e.g. 3GPP) and is
registered to another PLMN's serving network over another type of access
(e.g. non-3GPP), then the UE has two active NAS connections with different
AMF's in different PLMNs. As described in clause 6.3.2.1, the UE shall
independently maintain and use two different 5G security contexts, one per
PLMN serving network. The 5G security context maintained by the UE shall
contain the full set of 5G parameters, including NAS context parameters for
3GPP and non-3GPP access types per PLMN. In case of connection to two
different PLMNs, it is necessary to maintain a complete 5G NAS security
context for each PLMN independently, each with all associated parameters
(such as two pairs of NAS COUNTs, i.e. one pair for 3GPP access and one
pair for non-3GPP access).

Each security context shall be established separately via a successful
primary authentication procedure with the Home PLMN.

All the NAS and AS security mechanisms defined for single registration mode
are applicable independently on each access using the corresponding 5G
security context.

NOTE:  The UE belongs to a single HPLMN.


6.4.2.2  Multiple active NAS connections in the same PLMN's serving network

When the UE is registered in a serving network over two types of access
(e.g. 3GPP and non-3GPP), then the UE has two active NAS connections with
the same AMF. A common 5G NAS security context is created during the
registration procedure over the first access type.

In order to realize cryptographic separation and replay protection, the
common NAS security-context shall have parameters specific to each NAS
connection. The connection specific parameters include a pair of NAS COUNTs
for uplink and downlink and unique NAS connection identifier. The value of
the unique NAS connection identifier shall be set to "0x01" for 3GPP access
and set to "0x02" for non-3GPP access. All other parameters as e.g.
algorithm identifiers in the common NAS security context are common to
multiple NAS connections.

In non-mobility cases, when the UE is simultaneously registered over both
types of accesses, and if NAS key re-keying as described in clause 6.9.4.2
or if NAS key refresh as described in clause 6.9.4.3 takes place over one
of the accesses (say access A):

    1) If the other access (access B) is in CM-CONNECTED state, then the
    new NAS security context shall only be activated over that access
    (access A). The UE and the AMF shall not change the NAS security
    context in use on the other access (say access B). In order to activate
    the new NAS security context over the other access (access B), the AMF
    shall trigger a NAS SMC run over that access either in the current
    running procedure or a subsequent NAS procedure. During the second NAS
    SMC run (on access B), the AMF shall include the same ngKSI associated
    with the new NAS security context and the same algorithm choices as for
    the first access. After a successful second NAS SMC procedure over the
    other access (access B), both the UE and the AMF shall delete the old
    NAS security context.

2) Whenever the AMF sends a NAS SMC over access (access A) and AMF
considers the UE to not be in CM-CONNECTED state on the other access
(access B), the AMF shall additionally activate (if not already in use on
the other access) the security context that is active on the other
accesses. Similarly, whenever the UE receives a NAS SMC over the access
(access A) and UE is not in CM-CONNECTED state on the other access (access
B), the UE additionally activates (if not already in use on the other
access) the security context  on  the other access.

In case of 3GPP access mobility or interworking with EPS, the following
procedures apply:

  1) If the UE is in CM-CONNECTED state on the non-3GPP access, then:

a) if the AMF does not have the security context the UE is using on the non-
3GPP access (e.g. KAMF change on 3GPP access when the AMF changes), then in
order to activate the same NAS security context that is in use over the
3GPP access the AMF shall run a NAS SMC procedure on the non-3GPP access;
or

b) in the case of handover from EPS, then a mapped context will be in use
on the 3GPP access and a different security context will be active on the
non-3GPP access. To align the security contexts in use over both accesses,
the AMF shall run a NAS SMC procedure over one access to take into use on
that access the security context that is in use on the other access. In the
case that a native security context is in use on the non-3GPP access, then
the NAS SMC procedure shall be on the 3GPP access to take the native
security context into use.

  2) Whenever the AMF sends a Registration Accept over the 3GPP access and
  AMF considers the UE to not be in CM-CONNECTED state on the non-3GPP
  access, the AMF shall activate (if not already in use on the non-3GPP
  access) the security context that is in use on the 3GPP access on the non-
  3GPP access. The AMF shall keep a native security context that was in use
  on non-3GPP access if the security context in use on the 3GPP access is a
  mapped security context. In order to take this native security context
  into use, the AMF shall run a NAS SMC procedure.

Similarly, whenever the UE receives a Registration Accept over the 3GPP
access and UE is not in CM-CONNECTED state on the non-3GPP access, the UE
activates (if not already in use on the non-3GPP access) the security
context that is in use on the 3GPP access on the non-3GPP access. The UE
shall keep a native security context that was in use on non-3GPP access if
the security context in use on the 3GPP access is a mapped security
context.

To recover from a failure to align the NAS security contexts due to a state
 mis-match between AMF and UE, the AMF can align the security contexts in
use on the 3GPP and non-3GPP access using the a NAS SMC procedure during a
subsequent registration procedure (that was either initiated by the UE or
sent in response to a Service Reject if the UE sends a Service Request).


6.4.3  NAS integrity mechanisms


6.4.3.0  General

Integrity protection for NAS signalling messages shall be provided as part
of the NAS protocol.


6.4.3.1  NAS input parameters to integrity algorithm

The input parameters to the NAS 128-bit integrity algorithms as described
in Annex D shall be set as follows.

The KEY input shall be equal to the KNASint key.

The BEARER input shall be equal to the NAS connection identifier.

The DIRECTION bit shall be set to 0 for uplink and 1 for downlink.

The COUNT input shall be constructed as follows:

COUNT :=  0x00 || NAS COUNT

Where NAS COUNT is the 24-bit NAS UL COUNT or the 24-bit NAS DL COUNT
value, depending on the direction, that is associated to the current NAS
connection identified by the value used to form the BEARER input.

A NAS COUNT shall be constructed as follows:

NAS COUNT :=  NAS OVERFLOW || NAS SQN

Where

-  NAS OVERFLOW is a 16-bit value which is incremented each time the NAS
SQN is incremented from the maximum value.

-  NAS SQN is the 8-bit sequence number carried within each NAS message.

The use and mode of operation of the 128-bit integrity algorithms are
specified in Annex D.


6.4.3.2  NAS integrity activation

NAS integrity shall be activated using the NAS SMC procedure or after an
inter-system handover from EPC.

Replay protection shall be activated when integrity protection is
activated, except when the NULL integrity protection algorithm is selected.
Replay protection shall ensure that the receiver only accepts each incoming
NAS COUNT value once using the same NAS security context.

Once NAS integrity has been activated, NAS messages without integrity
protection shall not be accepted by the UE or the AMF. Before NAS integrity
has been activated, NAS messages without integrity protection shall only be
accepted by the UE or the AMF in certain cases where it is not possible to
apply integrity protection.

NAS integrity shall stay activated until the 5G security context is deleted
in either the UE or the AMF. It shall not be possible to change from non-
NULL integrity protection algorithm to NULL integrity protection.


6.4.3.3  NAS integrity failure handling

The supervision of failed NAS integrity checks shall be performed both in
the ME and the AMF. In case of failed integrity check (i.e. faulty or
missing NAS-MAC) is detected after the start of NAS integrity protection,
the concerned message shall be discarded except for some NAS messages
specified in TS 24.501 [35]. For those exceptions the AMF shall take the
actions specified in TS 24.501 [35] when receiving a NAS message with
faulty or missing NAS-MAC. Discarding NAS messages can happen on the AMF
side or on the ME side.


6.4.4  NAS confidentiality mechanisms


6.4.4.0  General

Confidentiality protection for NAS signalling messages shall be provided as
part of the NAS protocol.


6.4.4.1  NAS input parameters to confidentiality algorithm

The input parameters for the NAS 128-bit ciphering algorithms shall be the
same as the ones used for NAS integrity protection as described in clause
6.4.3, with the exception that a different key, KNASenc, is used as KEY,
and there is an additional input parameter, namely the length of the key
stream to be generated by the encryption algorithms.

The use and mode of operation of the 128-bit ciphering algorithms are
specified in Annex D.

NOTE:  In the context of the present subclause 6.4.4, a message is
considered ciphered also when the NULL encryption algorithm NEA0 is
applied.


6.4.4.2  NAS confidentiality activation

NAS confidentiality shall be activated using the NAS SMC procedure or after
an inter-system handover from EPC.

Once NAS confidentiality has been activated, NAS messages without
confidentiality protection shall not be accepted by the UE or the AMF.
Before NAS confidentiality has been activated, NAS messages without
confidentiality protection shall only be accepted by the UE or the AMF in
certain cases where it is not possible to apply confidentiality protection.


NAS confidentiality shall stay activated until the 5G security context is
deleted in either the UE or the AMF.


6.4.5  Handling of NAS COUNTs

The NAS security context created at the registration time of the first
access type contains the NAS integrity and encryption keys, selected
algorithm common for all NAS connections. In addition, each NAS connection
shall have a unique NAS connection identifier, a distinct pair of NAS
COUNTs, one NAS COUNT for uplink and one NAS COUNT for downlink, associated
with it. In the NAS security context, the NAS connection identifier shall
be the differentiator for the connection-specific parameters.

It is essential that the NAS COUNTs for a particular KAMF are not reset to
the start values (that is the NAS COUNTs only have their start value when a
new KAMF is generated). This prevents the security issue of using the same
NAS COUNTs with the same NAS keys, e.g. key stream re-use, in the case a UE
moves back and forth between two AMFs and the same NAS keys are re-derived.


In the AMF, all the distinct pairs of NAS COUNTs part of the same 5G NAS
security context, shall only be set to the start value in the following
cases:

-  for a partial native 5GC NAS security context created by a successful
primary authentication run on one of the NAS connections established
between the same AMF and the UE, or,

-  for a mapped 5G security context generated when a UE moves from an MME
to the AMF during both idle and connected mode mobility, or,

-  for a new KAMF taken into use in a target AMF during mobility
registration update or handover.

The start value of NAS COUNT shall be zero (0).


6.4.6  Protection of initial NAS message

The initial NAS message is the first NAS message that is sent after the UE
transitions from the idle state. The UE shall send a limited set of IEs
(called the cleartext IEs) including those needed to establish security in
the initial message when it has no NAS security context. When the UE has a
NAS security context, the UE shall send a message that has the complete
initial NAS message ciphered in a NAS Container along with the cleartext
IEs with whole message integrity protected. The complete initial message is
included in the NAS Security Mode Complete message in a NAS Container when
needed (e.g. AMF cannot find the used security context) in the latter case
and always in the former case as described below.

In case, the UE selects a PLMN other than Registered PLMN/EPLMN in the 5GMM-
IDLE state and the UE has a NAS security context containing the NEA0, then
the UE shall discard the NAS security context and shall follow the
procedure specified in this clause for protection of initial NAS message.

The protection of the initial NAS message proceeds as shown in Figure 6.4.6-
1.

[pic]

Figure 6.4.6-1: Protecting the initial NAS message

Step 1: The UE shall send the initial NAS message to the AMF. If the UE has
no NAS security context, the initial NAS message shall only contain the
cleartext IEs, i.e. subscription identifiers (e.g. SUCI or GUTIs), UE
security capabilities, ngKSI,  indication that the UE is moving from EPC,
Additional GUTI, and IE containing the TAU Request in the case idle
mobility from LTE.

If the UE has a NAS security context, the message sent shall contain the
information given above in cleartext and the complete initial NAS message
ciphered in a NAS container which is ciphered. With a NAS security context,
the sent message shall also be integrity protected. In the case that the
initial NAS message was protected and  the AMF has the same security
context, then steps 2 to 4 may be omitted In this case the AMF shall use
the complete initial NAS message that is in the NAS container as the
message to respond to..

Step 2: If the AMF is not able to find the security context locally or from
last visited AMF, or if the integrity check fails, then the AMF shall
initiate an authentication procedure with the UE. If the AMF fetches old
security context from the last visited AMF, the AMF may decipher the NAS
container with the same security context, and get the initial NAS message,
then the step 2b to 4 may be omitted. If the AMF fetches new K AMF from the
last visited AMF (receiving keyAmfChangeInd), the step 2b may be omitted.

Step 3: If the authentication of the UE is successful, the AMF shall send
the NAS Security Mode Command message. If the initial NAS message was
protected but did not pass the integrity check (due either to a MAC failure
or the AMF not being able to find the used security context) or the AMF
could not decrypt the complete initial NAS message in the NAS container
(due to receiving "keyAmfChangeInd" from the last visited AMF), then the
AMF shall include in the Security Mode Command message a flag requesting
the UE to send the complete initial NAS message in the NAS Security Mode
Complete message.

Step 4: The UE shall send the NAS Security Mode Complete message to the
network in response to a NAS Security Mode Command message. The NAS
Security Mode Complete message shall be ciphered and integrity protected.
Furthermore the NAS Security Mode Complete message shall include the
complete initial NAS message in a NAS Container if either requested by the
AMF or the UE sent the initial NAS message unprotected. The AMF shall use
the complete initial NAS message that is in the NAS container as the
message to respond to.

Step 5: The AMF shall send its response to the Initial NAS message. This
message shall be ciphered and integrity protected.


6.4.7  Security aspects of SMS over NAS

Specific services of SMS over NAS are defined in TS 23.501 [2], and
procedures for SMS over NAS are specified in TS 23.502 [8].

For registration and de-registration procedures for SMS over NAS, the
details are specified in subclause 4.13.3.1 and 4.13.3.2 in TS 23.502 [8].
The NAS message can be protected by NAS security mechanisms.

For MO/MT SMS over NAS via 3GPP/non-3GPP when the UE has already activated
NAS security with the AMF before sending/receiving SMS, the NAS Transport
message shall be ciphered and integrity protected using the NAS security
context by the UE/AMF as described in sub-clause 6.4 in the present
document.


6.5  RRC security mechanisms


6.5.1  RRC integrity mechanisms

RRC integrity protection shall be provided by the PDCP layer between UE and
gNB and no layers below PDCP shall be integrity protected. Replay
protection shall be activated when integrity protection is activated
(except for when the selected integrity protection algorithm is NIA0, see
Annex D). Replay protection shall ensure that the receiver accepts each
particular incoming PDCP COUNT value only once using the same AS security
context.

The use and mode of operation of the 128-NIA algorithms are specified in
Annex D.

The input parameters to the 128-bit NIA algorithms as described in Annex D
are the RRC message as MESSAGE, an 128-bit integrity key KRRCint as KEY, a
5-bit bearer identity BEARER which value is assigned as specified by TS
38.323 [23], the 1-bit direction of transmission DIRECTION and a bearer
specific direction dependent 32-bit input COUNT which corresponds to the 32-
bit PDCP COUNT.

The RRC integrity checks shall be performed both in the ME and the gNB. In
case failed integrity check (i.e. faulty or missing MAC-I) is detected
after the start of integrity protection, the concerned message shall be
discarded. This can happen on the gNB side or on the ME side. UE may
trigger a recovery procedure as specified in TS 38.331 [22].

NOTE: Failed integrity check does not always imply that the concerned
message is silently discarded.


6.5.2  RRC confidentiality mechanisms

RRC confidentiality protection is provided by the PDCP layer between UE and
gNB.

The use and mode of operation of the 128-NEA algorithms are specified in
Annex D.

The input parameters to the 128-bit NEA algorithms as described in Annex D
are a 128-bit cipher Key KRRCenc as KEY, a 5-bit bearer identity BEARER
which corresponds to the radio bearer identity, the 1-bit direction of
transmission DIRECTION, the length of the keystream required LENGTH and a
bearer specific direction dependent 32-bit input COUNT which corresponds to
the 32-bit PDCP COUNT.


6.5.3  RRC UE capability transfer procedure

The network should activate AS security (i.e., perform a successful AS SMC
procedure) before running the RRC UE capability transfer procedure.

With the exception of unauthenticated emergency calls and the UEs using
Control plane CIoT optimization,, if the network had acquired UE
capabilities using RRC UE capability transfer procedure before AS security
activation, then the network shall not store them locally for later use and
shall not send them to other network entities. In that case, the network
shall re-run the RRC UE capability transfer procedure after a successful AS
SMC procedure.

NOTE 1:  For UEs without AS security (e.g., UEs using Control Plane CIoT
optimization), RRC UE radio capability transfer procedure cannot be
protected.


6.6  UP security mechanisms


6.6.1  UP security policy

The SMF shall provide UP security policy for a PDU session to the ng-
eNB/gNB during the PDU session establishment procedure as specified in TS
23.502 [8].

The UP security policy shall indicate whether UP confidentiality and/or UP
integrity protection shall be activated or not for all DRBs belonging to
that PDU session. The UP security policy shall be used to activate UP
confidentiality and/or UP integrity for all DRBs belonging to the PDU
session.

The ng-eNB/gNB shall activate UP confidentiality and/or UP integrity
protection per each DRB, according to the received UP security policy,
using RRC signalling as defined in clause 6.6.2. If the user plane security
policy indicates "Required" or "Not needed", the ng-eNB/gNB shall not
overrule the UP security policy provided by the SMF. If the ng-eNB/gNB
cannot activate UP confidentiality and/or UP integrity protection when the
received UP security policy is "Required", the ng-eNB/gNB shall reject
establishment of UP resources for the PDU Session and indicate reject-cause
to the SMF. If the received UP security policy is "Not needed ", then the
establishment of the PDU Session shall proceed as described in
TS23.502[8]. Only if the UE indicates that it supports use of integrity
protection with ng-eNB, the ng-eNB can activate UP integrity protection.

NOTE 1:  Local SMF can override the confidentiality option in the UP
security policy received from the home SMF based on its local policy,
roaming agreement and/or regulatory requirements.

At an Xn-handover from the source ng-eNB/gNB to the target ng-eNB/gNB, the
source ng-eNB/gNB shall include in the HANDOVER REQUEST message, the UE's
UP security policy. If the UP security policy is Required, the target ng-
eNB/gNB shall reject all PDU sessions for which it cannot comply with the
corresponding received UP security policy and indicate the reject-cause to
the SMF. For the accepted PDU sessions, the target ng-eNB/gNB shall
activate UP confidentiality and/or UP integrity protection per DRB
according to the received UE's UP security policy and shall indicate that
to the UE in the HANDOVER COMMAND by the source ng-eNB/gNB. Only if the UE
indicates that it supports use of integrity protection with ng-eNB, the
target ng-eNB can activate UP integrity protection.

If the UE receives an indication in the HANDOVER COMMAND that UP integrity
protection and/or UP encryption for a PDU session is enabled at the target
ng-eNB/gNB, the UE shall generate or update the UP encryption key and/or UP
integrity protection key and shall activate UP encryption and/or UP
integrity protection for the respective PDU session.

NOTE 2:  If the security policy is Preferred, it is possible to have a
change in activation or deactivation of UP integrity after the handover.

Further, in the Path-Switch message, the target ng-eNB/gNB shall send the
UE's UP security policy and corresponding PDU session ID received from the
source ng-eNB/gNB to the SMF. The SMF shall verify that the UE's UP
security policy received from the target ng-eNB/gNB is the same as the UE's
UP security policy that the SMF has locally stored. If there is a mismatch,
the SMF shall send its locally stored UE's UP security policy of the
corresponding PDU sessions to the target ng-eNB/gNB. This UP security
policy information, if included by the SMF, is delivered to the target ng-
eNB/gNB in the Path-Switch Acknowledge message. The SMF shall support
logging capabilities for this  event and may take additional measures, such
as raising an alarm.

If the target ng-eNB/gNB receives UE's UP security policy from the SMF in
the Path-Switch Acknowledge message, the target ng-eNB/gNB shall update the
UE's UP security policy with the received UE's UP security policy. If UE's
current UP confidentiality and/or UP integrity protection activation is
different from the received UE's UP security policy, then the target ng-
eNB/gNB shall initiate intra-cell handover procedure which includes RRC
Connection Reconfiguration procedure to reconfigure the DRBs to activate or
de-activate the UP integrity/confidentiality as per the received policy
from SMF.

In case of the target ng-eNB/gNB receives both UE security capability and
UP security policy, then ng-eNB/gNB initiates the intra-cell handover
procedure which contains selected algorithm and an NCC to the UE.  New UP
keys shall be derived and used at both the UE and the target ng-eNB/gNB.

At an N2-handover the SMF shall send the UE's UP security policy to the
target ng-eNB/gNB via the target AMF. The target ng-eNB/gNB shall reject
all PDU sessions for which it cannot comply with the corresponding received
UP security policy and indicate the reject-cause to the SMF via the target
AMF. For all other PDU sessions, the target ng-eNB/gNB shall activate UP
confidentiality and/or UP integrity protection per DRB according to the
received UE's UP security policy. Only if the UE indicates that it supports
use of integrity protection with ng-eNB, the target ng-eNB can activate UP
integrity protection.

At interworking-handover from EPS to 5GS, the SMF+PGW-C provides the UE's
UP security policy to the target ng-eNB/gNB via the target AMF. The target
ng-eNB shall determine from the UP security policy received from the AMF
together with the UE indication that it supports user plane integrity
protection with ng-eNB in UE EPS security capabilities (i.e. bit EIA7),
whether to activate user plane integrity protection with the UE or not. The
target ng-eNB/gNB shall reject all DRBs for which it cannot comply with the
corresponding UP integrity protection policy in the UP security policy and
indicate the reject-cause to the source MME via the target AMF. For all
other DRBs, the target ng-eNB/gNB shall activate UP integrity protection
per DRB according to the used UP security policy. Only if the UE indicates
that it supports use of user plane integrity protection with ng-eNB, the
target ng-eNB can activate UP integrity protection. If the target AMF
detects in a Registration procedure following interworking-handover from
EPS to 5GS, and becomes aware of that there is a mismatch between the UE
EPS security capabilities received from the source MME and the one received
from the UE, and that the target ng-eNB may not have the UE capability
indicating UP IP support in UE EPS security capabilities, then the AMF
shall send an N2 CONTEXT MODIFICATION REQUEST message to inform the target
ng-eNB about the correct UE EPS security capabilities and target ng-eNB
shall take the new UE EPS security capabilities into account.


6.6.2  UP security activation mechanism

AS UP integrity protection and ciphering activation shall be done as part
of the DRB addition procedure using RRC Connection Reconfiguration
procedure as described in this clause, see Figure 6.6.2-1.

The SMF shall send the UP security policy to the gNB/ng-eNB as defined in
Clause 6.6.1.

[pic]

Figure 6.6.2-1: User plane (UP) security activation mechanism

1a.  This RRC Connection Reconfiguration procedure which is used to add
DRBs shall be performed only after RRC security has been activated as part
of the AS security mode command procedure defined in Clause 6.7.4.

1b.  The gNB/ng-eNB shall send the RRC Connection Reconfiguration message
to the UE for UP security activation containing indications for the
activation of UP integrity protection and ciphering for each DRB according
to the security policy.

1c.  If UP integrity protection is activated for DRBs as indicated in the
RRC Connection Reconfiguration message, and if the gNB/ng-eNB does not have
KUPint, the gNB/ng-eNB shall generate KUPint and UP integrity protection
for such DRBs shall start at the gNB/ng-eNB. Similarly, if UP ciphering is
activated for  DRBs as indicated in the RRC Connection Reconfiguration
message, and if the gNB/ng-eNB does not have KUPenc, the gNB/ng-eNB shall
generate KUPenc and UP ciphering for such DRBs shall start at the gNB/ng-
eNB.

2a.  UE shall verify the RRC Connection Reconfiguration message. If
successful:

2a.1 If UP integrity protection is activated for DRBs as indicated in the
RRC Connection Reconfiguration message, and if the UE does not have KUPint,
the UE shall generate KUPint and UP integrity protection for such DRBs
shall start at the UE.

2a.2 Similarly, if UP ciphering is activated for DRBs as indicated in the
RRC Connection Reconfiguration message, and if the UE does not have KUPenc,
the UE shall generate KUPenc and UP ciphering for such DRBs shall start at
the UE

2b.  If the UE successfully verifies integrity of the RRC Connection
Reconfiguration message, the UE shall send the RRC Connection
Reconfiguration Complete message to the gNB/ng-eNB.

If UP integrity protection is not activated for DRBs, the gNB/ng-eNB and
the UE shall not integrity protect the traffic of such DRB and shall not
put MAC-I into PDCP packet.

If UP ciphering is not activated for DRBs, the gNB/ng-eNB and the UE shall
not cipher the traffic of such DRBs.




6.6.3  UP confidentiality mechanisms

The PDCP protocol, as specified in TS 38.323 [23] between the UE and the NG-
RAN, shall be responsible for user plane data confidentiality protection.

The use and mode of operation of the 128-bit NEA algorithms are specified
in Annex D.

The input parameters to the 128-bit NEA algorithms as described in Annex D
are the message packet, an 128-bit cipher key KUPenc as KEY, a 5-bit bearer
identity BEARER which value is assigned as specified by TS 38.323 [23], the
1-bit direction of transmission DIRECTION, the length of the keystream
required LENGTH and a bearer specific, and direction dependent 32-bit input
COUNT which corresponds to the 32-bit PDCP COUNT.


6.6.4  UP integrity mechanisms


6.6.4.1  General

The PDCP protocol, as specified in TS 38.323 [23] between the UE and the NG-
RAN, shall be responsible for user plane data integrity protection.


6.6.4.2  UP integrity mechanisms between the UE and the gNB

The use and mode of operation of the 128-bit NIA algorithms are specified
in Annex D.

The input parameters to the 128-bit NIA algorithms as described in Annex D
are, the message packet, a 128-bit integrity key KUPint as KEY, a 5-bit
bearer identity BEARER value of which is assigned as specified by TS 38.323
[23], the 1-bit direction of transmission DIRECTION, and a bearer specific,
and direction dependent 32-bit input COUNT which corresponds to the 32-bit
PDCP COUNT.

If the gNB or the UE receives a PDCP PDU which fails integrity check with
faulty or missing MAC-I after the start of integrity protection, the PDU
shall be discarded.


6.6.4.3  UP integrity mechanisms between the UE and the ng-eNB

If the UE supports E-UTRA connected to 5GC, the UE shall indicate support
of integrity protection by setting the EIA7 algorithm bit in 5G UE Security
Capability IE (see clause 9.11.3.54 of TS 24.501 [35]) to indicate that the
UE supports user plane integrity protection with an ng-eNB.

If the 128-NIA algorithm is signalled by the ng-eNB to the UE, clause
6.6.4.2 applies.

If the 128-EIA algorithm is signalled by the ng-eNB to the UE, the
following applies:

-  The use and mode of operation of the 128-EIA algorithms are specified in
Annex B of TS 33.401 [10].

-  The input parameters to the 128-bit EIA algorithms as described in Annex
B of TS 33.401 [10] are, the message packet, a 128-bit integrity key KUPint
as KEY, a 5-bit bearer identity BEARER value of which is assigned as
specified by TS 38.323 [23], the 1-bit direction of transmission DIRECTION,
and a bearer specific, time and direction dependent 32-bit input COUNT
which corresponds to the 32-bit PDCP COUNT.

NOTE: The ng-eNB decides whether to signal 128-NIA or 128-EIA algorithm
(cf. clause 5.3.1.2 of TS 36.331 [69]).

If the ng-eNB or the UE receives a PDCP PDU which fails integrity check
with faulty or missing MAC-I after the start of integrity protection, the
PDU shall be discarded.

UE and the ng-eNB (or the ng-eNB acting as the MN) shall derive UP
integrity key as specified in Annex A.7 of TS 33.401 [10], with the KeNB
set to KgNB.


6.7  Security algorithm selection, key establishment and security mode
         command procedure


6.7.1  Procedures for NAS algorithm selection


6.7.1.1  Initial NAS security context establishment

Each AMF shall be configured via network management with lists of
algorithms which are allowed for usage. There shall be one list for NAS
integrity algorithms, and one for NAS ciphering algorithms. These lists
shall be ordered according to a priority decided by the operator.

To establish the NAS security context, the AMF shall choose one NAS
ciphering algorithm and one NAS integrity protection algorithm. The AMF
shall then initiate a NAS security mode command procedure, and include the
chosen algorithm and UE security capabilities (to detect modification of
the UE security capabilities by an attacker) in the message to the UE (see
sub-clause 6.7.2 of the present document). The AMF shall select the NAS
algorithm which have the highest priority according to the ordered lists.


6.7.1.2  AMF change

If the change of the AMF at N2-Handover or mobility registration update
results in the change of algorithm to be used for establishing NAS
security, the target AMF shall indicate the selected algorithm to the UE as
defined in Clause 6.9.2.3.3 for N2-Handover (i.e., using NAS Container) and
Clause 6.9.3 for mobility registration update (i.e., using NAS SMC). The
AMF shall select the NAS algorithm which has the highest priority according
to the ordered lists (see sub-clause 6.7.1.1 of the present document).


6.7.2  NAS security mode command procedure

The NAS SMC shown in Figure 6.7.2-1 shall be used to establish NAS Security
context between the UE and the AMF. This procedure consists of a roundtrip
of messages between the AMF and the UE. The AMF sends the NAS Security Mode
Command message to the UE and the UE replies with the NAS Security Mode
Complete message.

NOTE 1:  The NAS SMC procedure is designed such that it protects the
Registration Request against a man-in-the-middle attack where the attacker
modifies the IEs containing the UE security capabilities provided by the UE
in the Registration Request. It works as follows: if the method completes
successfully, the UE is attached to the network knowing that no bidding
down attack has happened. In case a bidding down attack was attempted, the
verification of the NAS SMC will fail and the UE replies with a reject
message meaning that the UE will not attach to the network.

[pic]

Figure 6.7.2-1: NAS Security Mode Command procedure

1a.  The AMF activates the NAS integrity protection before sending the NAS
Security Mode Command message.

1b.  The AMF sends the NAS Security Mode Command message to the UE. The NAS
Security Mode Command message shall contain: the replayed UE security
capabilities, the selected NAS algorithms, and the ngKSI for identifying
the KAMF. The NAS Security Mode Command message may contain:
K_AMF_change_flag (carried in the additional 5G security parameters IE
specified in TS 24.501 [35]) to indicate a new KAMF is calculated,  a flag
requesting the complete initial NAS message (see subclause 6.4.6), Anti-
Bidding down Between Architectures (ABBA) parameter. In the case of
horizontal derivation of KAMF during mobility registration update or during
multiple registration in same PLMN, K_AMF_change_flag shall be included in
the NAS Security Mode Command message as described in clause 6.9.3.

This message shall be integrity protected (but not ciphered) with NAS
integrity key based on the KAMF indicated by the ngKSI in the NAS Security
Mode Command message (see Figure 6.7.2-1).

NOTE 2: Void.

In case the network supports interworking using the N26 interface between
MME and AMF, the AMF shall also include the selected EPS NAS algorithms
(defined in Annex B of TS 33.401 [10]) to be used after mobility to EPS in
the NAS Security Mode Command message (see clause 8.5.2). The UE shall
store the algorithms for use after mobility to EPS using the N26 interface
between MME and AMF. The AMF shall store the selected EPS NAS algorithms in
the UE security context.

NOTE 2a: When AMF change happens either due to N2-handover or idle mode
mobility, the selected EPS NAS algorithms is always included in the 5G UE
security context and provided to the target AMF as part of the 5G UE
security context.

1c. The AMF activates NAS uplink deciphering after sending the NAS Security
Mode Command message.

2a. The UE shall verify the NAS Security Mode Command message. This
includes checking that the UE security capabilities sent by the AMF match
the ones stored in the UE to ensure that these were not modified by an
attacker and verifying the integrity protection using the indicated NAS
integrity algorithm and the NAS integrity key based on the KAMF indicated
by the ngKSI.

In case the NAS Security Mode Command message includes a K_AMF_change_flag,
the UE shall derive a new KAMF as described in Annex A.13 and set the NAS
COUNTs to zero.

If the verification of the integrity of the NAS Security Mode Command
message is successful, the UE shall start NAS integrity protection and
ciphering/deciphering with the security context indicated by the ngKSI.

2b. The UE sends the NAS Security Mode Complete message to the AMF ciphered
and integrity protected. The NAS Security Mode Complete message shall
include PEI in case AMF requested it in the NAS Security Mode Command
message. The AMF shall set the NAS COUNTs to zero if horizontal derivation
of KAMF is performed. The UE may include the complete initial NAS message
(see subclause 6.4.6 for details).

If the verification of the NAS Security Mode Command message is not
successful in the UE, it shall reply with a NAS Security Mode Reject
message (see TS 24.501 [35]). The NAS Security Mode Reject message and all
subsequent NAS messages shall be protected with the previous, if any, 5G
NAS security context, i.e., the 5G NAS security context used prior to the
failed NAS Security Mode Command message. If no 5G NAS security context
existed prior to the NAS Security Mode Command message, the NAS Security
Mode Reject message shall remain unprotected.

NOTE 2b: Void.

The AMF shall de-cipher and check the integrity protection on the NAS
Security Mode Complete message using the key and algorithm indicated in the
NAS Security Mode Command message. NAS downlink ciphering at the AMF with
this security context shall start after receiving the NAS Security Mode
Complete message.

1d. The AMF activates NAS downlink ciphering.

NOTE 3:  If the uplink NAS COUNT will wrap around by sending the NAS
Security Mode Reject message, the UE releases the NAS connection instead of
sending the NAS Security Mode Reject message.

NOTE 4:  If the AMF successfully validated the NAS SMC Complete message,
the AMF has successfully confirmed the SUPI received from the home network
and the SUPI used by the UE match (as required in clause 5.5.3). However,
integrity check failure of the NAS SMC Complete message at the AMF could
have other causes than a mismatch of the SUPIs.


6.7.3  Procedures for AS algorithm selection


6.7.3.0  Initial AS security context establishment

This clause provides the details for AS security algorithms negotiation and
consideration during the UE initial AS security context establishment.

Each gNB/ng-eNB shall be configured via network management with lists of
algorithms which are allowed for usage. There shall be one list for
integrity algorithms, and one for ciphering algorithms. These lists shall
be ordered according to a priority decided by the operator. When AS
security context is to be established in the gNB/ng-eNB, the AMF shall send
the UE 5G security capabilities to the gNB/ng-eNB. The gNB/ng-eNB shall
choose the ciphering algorithm which has the highest priority from its
configured list and is also present in the UE 5G security capabilities.

The gNB/ng-eNB shall choose the integrity algorithm which has the highest
priority from its configured list and is also present in the UE 5G security
capabilities. The chosen algorithms shall be indicated to the UE in the AS
SMC. The chosen ciphering algorithm is used for ciphering (when activated)
of the user plane and RRC traffic. The chosen integrity algorithm is used
for integrity protection (when activated) of the user plane and RRC
traffic. Activation of ciphering and integrity protection for the RRC
traffic shall be done as defined by clause 6.7.4. Activation of ciphering
and integrity protection for the user plane traffic shall be done based on
the UP security policy received from the SMF as defined by clause 6.6.2.


6.7.3.1  Xn-handover

At handover from a source gNB/ng-eNB over Xn to a target gNB/ng-eNB, the
source gNB/ng-eNB shall include the UE's 5G security capabilities and
ciphering and integrity algorithms used in the source cell in the handover
request message. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall select the algorithm with
highest priority from the received 5G security capabilities of the UE
according to the prioritized locally configured list of algorithms (this
applies for both integrity and ciphering algorithms). The chosen algorithms
shall be indicated to the UE in the Handover Command message if the target
gNB/ng-eNB selects different algorithms compared to the source gNB/ng-eNB.
If the UE does not receive any selection of integrity and ciphering
algorithms, it continues to use the same algorithms as before the handover
(see TS 38.331 [22] for gNB or TS 36.331 [69] for ng-eNB). When a Xn-
handover takes place from ng-eNB to gNB or vice versa, then the selected
algorithms in the target node shall always be signalled in the Handover
Command to the UE. In the Path-Switch message, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall
send the UE's 5G security capabilities received from the source gNB/ng-eNB
to the AMF. The AMF shall verify that the UE's 5G security capabilities
received from the target gNB/ng-eNB are the same as the UE's 5G security
capabilities that the AMF has locally stored. If there is a mismatch, the
AMF shall send its locally stored 5G security capabilities of the UE to the
target gNB/ng-eNB in the Path-Switch Acknowledge message. The AMF shall
support logging capabilities for this event and may take additional
measures, such as raising an alarm.

If the target gNB/ng-eNB receives UE's 5G security capabilities from the
AMF in the Path-Switch Acknowledge message, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall
update the AS security context of the UE with these 5G security
capabilities of the UE. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall select the algorithm
with highest priority from these 5G security capabilities according to the
locally configured prioritized list of algorithms (this applies for both
integrity and ciphering algorithms). If the algorithms selected by the
target gNB/ng-eNB are different from the algorithms used at the source
gNB/ng-eNB, then the target gNB/ng-eNB shall initiate intra-cell handover
procedure which includes RRC Connection Reconfiguration procedure
indicating the selected algorithms and an NCC to the UE.

NOTE:  Transferring the ciphering and integrity algorithms used in the
source cell to the target gNB/ng-eNB in the handover request message allows
for the target gNB/ng-eNB to decipher and verify the integrity of the RRC
Reestablishment Complete message on SRB1 in the potential RRC Connection Re-
establishment procedure. The information is also used by the target gNB/ng-
eNB to decide if it is necessary to include a new selection of security
algorithms in the Handover Command message.


6.7.3.2  N2-handover

At handover from a source gNB/ng-eNB to a target gNB/ng-eNB over N2
(possibly including an AMF change and hence a transfer of the UE's 5G
security capabilities from the source AMF to the target AMF), the target
AMF shall send the UE's 5G security capabilities to the target gNB/ng-eNB
in the NGAP HANDOVER REQUEST message (see TS 33.413 [34]). The target
gNB/ng-eNB shall select the algorithm with highest priority from the UE's
5G security capabilities according to the locally configured prioritized
list of algorithms (this applies for both integrity and ciphering
algorithms). The chosen algorithms shall be indicated to the UE in the
Handover Command message if the target gNB/ng-eNB selects different
algorithms compared to the source gNB/ng-eNB. If the UE does not receive
any selection of integrity and ciphering algorithms, it continues to use
the same algorithms as before the handover (see TS 38.331 [22]).

For N2-handover, the source gNB/ng-eNB shall include AS algorithms used in
the source cell (ciphering and integrity algorithms) in the source to
target transparent container that shall be sent to the target gNB/ng-eNB.
The AS algorithms used by the source cell are provided to the target gNB/ng-
eNB so that it can use them during the potential RRC Connection Re-
establishment procedure use them as specified in clause 6.11 for gNB and TS
33.401 [10] for ng-eNB.


6.7.3.3  Intra-gNB-CU handover/intra-ng-eNB handover

It is not required to change the AS security algorithms during intra-gNB-
CU/intra-ng-eNB handover. If the UE does not receive an indication of new
AS security algorithms during an intra-gNB-CU/intra-ng-eNB handover, the UE
shall continue to use the same algorithms as before the handover (see TS
38.331 [22] for gNB and TS 36.331 [69] for ng-eNB).


6.7.3.4  Transitions from RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED states

At state transition from RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED, the source gNB/ng-
eNB shall include the UE 5G security capabilities and the ciphering and
integrity algorithms the UE was using with the source cell in the Xn-AP
Retrieve UE Context Response message.

The target gNB/ng-eNB shall check if it supports the received algorithms,
if the target gNB/ng-eNB supports the received ciphering and integrity
algorithms, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall check the received algorithms to
its locally configured list of algorithms (this applies for both integrity
and ciphering algorithms). If the target gNB/ng-eNB selects the same
security algorithms, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall use the selected
algorithms to derive RRC integrity and RRC encryption keys to protect the
RRCResume message and send to the UE on SRB1.

If the target gNB/ng-eNB does not support the received algorithms or if the
target gNB/ng-eNB prefers to use different algorithms, the target gNB/ng-
eNB shall send an RRCSetup message on SRB0 in order to proceed with RRC
connection establishment as if the UE was in RRC_IDLE (fallback procedure)
to the UE. Then the UE performs NAS based RRC recovery and negotiates a
suitable algorithm with target gNB/ng-eNB via AS SMC procedure.


6.7.3.5  RNA Update procedure

If the source gNB/ng-eNB decides to relocate UE context to the target
gNB/ng-eNB during an RNA Update procedure, the source gNB/ng-eNB shall
include the UE 5G security capabilities and the ciphering and integrity
algorithms the UE was using with the source cell in the <Xn-AP Retrieve UE
Context Response> message. AS security algorithm selection is as described
in clause 6.7.3.4.


6.7.3.6  Algorithm negotiation for unauthenticated UEs in LSM

UEs that are in limited service mode (LSM) and that cannot be authenticated
by the AMF/SEAF (for whatever reason) may still be allowed to establish
emergency session by sending the emergency registration request message. It
shall be possible to configure whether the AMF allows unauthenticated UEs
in LSM to establish bearers for emergency session or not. If an AMF allows
unauthenticated UEs in LSM to establish bearers for an emergency session,
then for the NAS protocol, the AMF shall use NIA0 and NEA0 as the integrity
and ciphering algorithm respectively.

If the AMF allows an unauthenticated UE in LSM to establish bearers for
emergency session after it has received the emergency registration request
message from the UE, the AMF shall:

-  Select NIA0 and NEA0, regardless of the supported algorithms announced
previously by the UE as the NAS algorithms and signal this to the UE via
the NAS security mode command procedure when activating the 5G NAS security
context.

-  Set the UE 5G security capabilities to only contain EIA0, EEA0, NIA0 and
NEA0 when sending these to the gNB/ng-eNB  in the following messages:

-  NGAP UE INITIAL CONTEXT SETUP

-  NGAP UE CONTEXT MODIFICATION REQUEST

-  NGAP HANDOVER REQUEST

NOTE:  As a result of that the AMF only sending a UE 5G security capability
containing EIA0, EEA0, NIA0 and NEA0 to the gNB/ng-eNB , the gNB/ng-eNB  is
only able of selecting a null integrity protection for AS integrity
protection and a null ciphering algorithm for AS confidentiality
protection. That is, if NIA0 is used for NAS integrity protection, then
NIA0 or EIA0 will always be used for AS integrity protection.

If NIA0 is disabled at the gNB for regulatory requirements and the gNB
receives the UE 5G security capabilities to only contain NIA0 for integrity
protection algorithms from the AMF in one of the above messages, the gNB
shall reject the session.

The rules for when the AMF shall select NIA0 for NAS integrity protection,
and when the UE shall accept a NAS security mode command selecting NIA0 for
NAS integrity protection depends on whether the UE and AMF can be certain
that no 5G NAS security context can be established. The rules for
determining this is defined in clause 10 of this specification. If the AMF
has selected NIA0 as the NAS integrity protection algorithm, the UE shall
accept selection of NIA0 or EIA0 as the AS integrity protection algorithm.
Selection of AS integrity protection algorithm happens via the AS security
mode command procedure or via a handover command. The UE shall under no
other circumstances accept selection of null integrity algorithm as the AS
integrity protection algorithm.


6.7.4  AS security mode command procedure

The AS SMC procedure is for RRC and UP security algorithms negotiation and
RRC security activation. for the gNB/ng-eNB. AS SMC procedure can be
triggered to establish a secure RRC signalling-only connection during UE
registration or PDU session establishment as specified in TS 38.413 [34]
and TS 23.502 [8]. The activation of UP security is as described in clause
6.6.2. AS SMC procedure consists of a roundtrip of messages between gNB/ng-
eNB and UE. The gNB/ng-eNB sends the AS security mode command to the UE and
the UE replies with the AS security mode complete message. See Figure 6.7.4-
1.

The AS security mode command message sent from gNB/ng-eNB to UE shall
contain the selected RRC and UP encryption and integrity algorithms. This
AS security mode command message shall be integrity protected with RRC
integrity key based on the current KgNB.

The AS security mode complete message from UE to gNB/ng-eNB shall be
integrity protected with the selected RRC algorithm indicated in the AS
security mode command message and RRC integrity key based on the current
KgNB.

RRC downlink ciphering (encryption) at the gNB/ng-eNB shall start after
sending the AS security mode command message. RRC uplink deciphering
(decryption) at the gNB/ng-eNB shall start after receiving and successful
verification of the AS security mode complete message.

RRC uplink ciphering (encryption) at the UE shall start after sending the
AS security mode complete message. RRC downlink deciphering (decryption) at
the UE shall start after receiving and successful verification of the AS
security mode command message.

If any control of the AS security mode command is not successful in the UE,
the UE shall reply with an unprotected security mode failure message (see
TS 38.331[22]).

Ciphering and integrity protection of UP downlink and uplink, at the UE and
the gNB/ng-eNB, shall start as defined by clause 6.6.2.

AS SMC shall be used only during an initial context setup between the UE
and the gNB/ng-eNB (i.e., to activate an initial KgNB at RRC_IDLE to
RRC_CONNECTED state transition).

NOTE:  Derivation of a KgNB at RRC_IDLE to RRC_CONNECTED state ensures that
AS SMC establishes a fresh KgNB. Consequently, the PDCP COUNTs can be
reset.

[pic]

Figure 6.7.4-1: AS Security Mode Command Procedure


6.8  Security handling in state transitions


6.8.1  Key handling at connection and registration state transitions


6.8.1.1  Key handling at transitions between RM-DEREGISTERED and RM-
         REGISTERED states


6.8.1.1.0   General

One state machine in the UE and AMF is handling the registration states
over 3GPP access and a second state machine is handling the registration
states over non-3GPP access. This clause and its sub-clauses applies to
both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access. UDM manages separate/independent UE
Registration procedure for each access. The AMF shall associate
Registration state per access type with the UE.


6.8.1.1.1   Transition from RM-REGISTERED to RM-DEREGISTERED

There are different reasons for transition to the RM-DEREGISTERED state. If
a NAS messages leads to state transition to RM-DEREGISTERED, it shall be
security protected by the current 5G NAS security context (mapped or
native), if such exists in the UE or the AMF.

NOTE:  The present document only considers the states RM-DEREGISTERED and
RM REGISTERED and transitions between these two states. Other documents
define additional RM states (see, e.g. 5GMM states in TS 24.501 [35]).

On transitioning to RM-DEREGISTERED, the UE and AMF shall do the following:

1. If they have a full non-current native 5G NAS security context and a
current mapped 5G NAS security context, then they shall make the non-
current native 5G NAS security context the current one.

2. They shall delete any mapped or partial 5G NAS security contexts they
hold.

Handling of the remaining security parameters for each of these cases are
given below:

1. Registration reject: All remaining security parameters shall be removed
from the UE and AMF

2. Deregistration:

a. UE-initiated

i. If the reason is switch off then all the remaining security parameters
shall be removed from the UE and AMF with the exception of the current
native 5G NAS security context (as in clause 6.1.1), which should remain
stored in the AMF and UE.

ii.  If the reason is not switch off then AMF and UE shall keep all the
remaining security parameters.

b. AMF-initiated

i. Explicit: all the remaining security parameters shall be kept in the UE
and AMF if the de-registration  type is "re-registration required".

ii.  Implicit: all the remaining security parameters shall be kept in the
UE and AMF.

c. UDM/ARPF-initiated: If the message is "subscription withdrawn" then all
the remaining security parameters shall be removed from the UE and AMF.

3. Registration reject: There are various reasons for Registration reject.
The action to be taken shall be as given in TS 24.501 [35].

Storage of the full native 5G NAS security context including the pair(s) of
distinct NAS COUNT values associated with each access together with
respective NAS connection identifier, excluding the UE security
capabilities and the keys KNASint and KNASenc, in the UE when the UE
transitions to RM-DEREGISTERED state is done as follows:

a) If the ME does not have a full native 5G NAS security context in
volatile memory, any existing native 5G NAS security context stored on the
USIM or in non-volatile memory of the ME shall be marked as invalid.

b) If the USIM supports RM parameters storage, then the ME shall store the
full native 5G NAS security context parameters on the USIM (except for
KNASint and KNASenc), mark the native 5G NAS security context on the USIM
as valid, and not keep any native 5G NAS security context in non-volatile
ME memory.

c) If the USIM does not support RM parameters storage, then the ME shall
store the full native 5G NAS security context (except for KNASint and
KNASenc) in a non-volatile part of its memory and mark the native 5G NAS
security context in its non-volatile memory as valid.

d) For the case that the AMF or the UE enter RM-DEREGISTERED state without
using any of the above procedures, the handling of the remaining security
parameters shall be as specified in TS 24.501 [35].


6.8.1.1.2   Transition from RM-DEREGISTERED to RM-REGISTERED


6.8.1.1.2.1 General

When starting the transition away from RM DEREGISTERED state with the
intent to eventually transitioning to RM-REGISTERED state, if no current 5G
NAS security context is available in the ME, the ME shall retrieve native
5G NAS security context stored on the USIM if the USIM supports RM
parameters storage and if the stored native 5G NAS security context on the
USIM is marked as valid. If the USIM does not support RM parameters storage
the ME shall retrieve stored native 5G NAS security context from its non-
volatile memory if the native 5G NAS security context is marked as valid.
The ME shall derive the KNASint and KNASenc from the KAMF after retrieving
the stored 5G NAS security context; see Annex A on NAS key derivation. The
retrieved native 5G NAS security context with the derived KNASint and
KNASenc shall then become the current 5G NAS security context.

When the ME is transitioning away from RM DEREGISTERED state with the
intent to eventually transitioning to RM-REGISTERED state, if the USIM
supports RM parameters storage, the ME shall mark the stored 5G NAS
security context on the USIM as invalid. If the USIM does not support RM
parameters storage, the ME shall mark the stored 5G NAS security context in
its non-volatile memory as invalid.

If the ME uses a 5G NAS security context to protect NAS messages, the
distinct NAS COUNT values together with the NAS connection identifier
associated with this access, are updated in the volatile memory of the ME.
If the attempt to transition away from RM DEREGISTERED state with the
intent to eventually transitioning to RM-REGISTERED state fails, the ME
shall store the (possibly updated) 5G NAS security context including the
distinct NAS COUNT values together with the NAS connection identifier
associated with this access, on the USIM or non-volatile ME memory and mark
it as valid.

NOTE:  The present document only considers the states RM-DEREGISTERED and
RM REGISTERED and transitions between these two states. Other documents
define additional RM states (see, e.g. 5GMM states in TS 24.501 [35]).

When the UE transits from RM-DEREGISTERED to RM-REGISTERED/CM-CONNECTED,
there are two cases to consider, either a full native 5G NAS security
context exists, or it does not.


6.8.1.1.2.2 Full native 5G NAS security context available

The UE shall transmit a NAS Registration Request message. This message is
integrity protected using the distinct NAS COUNT values and the NAS
connection identifier associated with this access. For the case that the 5G
NAS security context used by the UE is non-current in the AMF, the AMF
shall delete any existing current 5G security context and make the used 5G
security context the current 5G security contex.  Furthermore, provided
that the NAS Registration Request was with "PDU session(s) to be re-
activated" and there is no NAS SMC procedure before the AS SMC the NAS
COUNT of the Registration Request message shall be used to derive the
KgNB/KeNB with the KDF as specified in Annex A.

As a result of the NAS Registration Request with "PDU session(s) to be re-
activated", the gNB/ng-eNB shall send an AS SMC to the UE to activate AS
security. The KgNB/KeNB used, is derived in the current 5G NAS security
context.

When the UE receives the AS SMC without having received a NAS Security Mode
Command after the Registration Request with "PDU session(s) to be re-
activated", it shall use the uplink NAS COUNT of the Registration Request
message that triggered the AS SMC to be sent as freshness parameter in the
derivation of the initial KgNB/KeNB. From this initial KgNB/KeNB the RRC
protection keys and the UP protection keys shall be derived as described in
sub-clause 6.2.3.1.

The same procedure for generating initial KgNB/KeNB can be used regardless
of the fact if the UE is connecting to the same AMF to which it was
connected previously or to a different AMF. In case UE connects to a
different AMF and this AMF selects different NAS algorithms, the NAS keys
have to be re-derived in the AMF with the new algorithm IDs as input using
the KDF as specified in Annex A.

In addition, there is a need for the AMF to send a NAS SMC to the UE to
indicate the change of NAS algorithms and to take the re-derived NAS keys
into use. The UE shall assure that the NAS keys used to verify the
integrity of the NAS SMC are derived using the algorithm ID specified in
the NAS SMC. The NAS SMC Command and NAS SMC Complete messages are
protected with the new NAS keys.

If there is a NAS Security Mode Command after the Registration Request with
"PDU session(s) to be re-activated" but before the AS SMC, the UE and AMF
use the uplink NAS COUNT of the most recent NAS Security Mode Complete and
the related KAMF as the parameter in the derivation of the KgNB/KeNB. From
this KgNB/KeNB the RRC protection keys and the UP protection keys are
derived as described in sub-clause 6.2.3.1.


6.8.1.1.2.3 Full native 5G NAS security context not available

If in the process described in clause 6.8.1.1.2.2, there is no full native
5G NAS security context available in the AMF (i.e. either the UE has sent
an unprotected Registration Request message or the UE has protected the
Registration Request message with a current native 5G security context
which no longer is stored in the AMF) a primary authentication run is
required. If there is a full native 5G NAS security context available in
the AMF, then the AMF may (according to AMF policy) decide to run a new
primary authentication and a NAS SMC procedure (which activates the new 5G
NAS security context based on the KAMF derived during the primary
authentication run) after the Registration Request.

If the Registration Request was with "PDU session(s) to be re-activated",
the NAS SMC procedure is executed before the corresponding AS SMC. The NAS
(uplink and downlink) COUNTs are set to start values, and the start value
of the uplink NAS COUNT shall be used as freshness parameter in the
KgNB/KeNB derivation from the fresh KAMF (after primary authentication)
when UE receives AS SMC the KgNB/KeNB is derived from the current 5G NAS
security context, i.e., the fresh KAMF is used to derive the KgNB/KeNB. The
KDF as specified in clause Annex A shall be used to derive the KgNB/KeNB.

NOTE:  Using the start value for the uplink NAS COUNT in this case cannot
lead to the same combination of KAMF and NAS COUNT being used twice. This
is guaranteed by the fact that the first integrity protected NAS message
the UE sends to the AMF after primary authentication is the NAS SMC
complete message.

The NAS SMC complete message shall include the start value of the uplink
NAS COUNT that is used as freshness parameter in the KgNB/KeNB derivation
and the KAMF is fresh. After a primary authentication, a NAS SMC needs to
be sent from the AMF to the UE in order to take the new NAS keys into use.
Both NAS SMC and NAS SMC Complete messages are protected with the new NAS
keys.


6.8.1.1.2.4 UE registration over a second access type to the same AMF

It is assumed in this clause that the UE is already registered over a first
access type (say access A). Clauses 6.8.1.1.2.1 and 6.8.1.1.2.2 applies as
well when the UE attempts to register over a new access type (access B) to
the same AMF with the following addition/exception:

Whenever the UE registers over a second access type (access B) to the same
AMF, with the intention to transitioning from RM-DEREGISTERED to RM-
REGISTERED state, then a full native 5G NAS security context is already
available in the UE and the AMF. In this case, the UE shall directly take
into use the available full 5G NAS security context and use it to protect
the Registration Request over the second access using the distinct pair of
NAS COUNTs for this second access type (access B).

The AMF may decide to run a new primary authentication as part of the
Registration procedure on this second access (access B). If a new primary
authentication is run, then the new derived partial 5G NAS security context
needs to be taken into use on this second access (access B) with a NAS SMC
using the distinct pair of NAS COUNTs for this second access. As the UE is
already registered on the first access (access A), then the AMF needs to
run a NAS SMC procedure on the first access in order to take the partial 5G
NAS security context into use as described in clause 6.4.2.2.

If there is a need for the AMF to take a new partial 5G NAS security
context into use, derived from primary authentication executed on the first
access (access A), then the AMF needs to send a NAS SMC to the UE on the
second access (access B) in order to take the new partial 5G NAS security
context into use as described in clause 6.4.2.2.


6.8.1.2  Key handling at transitions between CM-IDLE and CM-CONNECTED
         states


6.8.1.2.0   General

One state machine in the UE and AMF is handling the connection states over
3GPP access and a second state machine is handling the connection states
over non-3GPP access. This clause and its sub-clauses applies to both 3GPP
access and non-3GPP access when not explicitly stated.


6.8.1.2.1   Transition from CM-IDLE to CM-CONNECTED

The UE sends an initial NAS message to initiate transition from CM-IDLE to
CM-CONNECTED state (see TS 24.501 [35].

If a full native 5G NAS security context is already available in the UE and
the AMF, then the UE shall directly take into use the available full 5G NAS
security context and use it to protect the initial NAS message using the
distinct pair of NAS COUNTs together with the NAS connection identifier for
this access.

If the UE is simultaneously registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP
access in the same AMF, then if there is a need for the AMF to take a new
partial 5G NAS security context into use on this access (access A), derived
from primary authentication executed on a different access, then the AMF
needs to send a NAS SMC to the UE on this access (access A) in order to
take the new partial 5G NAS security context also into use on this access
as described in clause 6.4.2.2.

On transitions to CM-CONNECTED, the AMF should be able to check whether a
new authentication is required, e.g. because of prior inter-provider
handover.

If the UE is simultaneously registered over both 3GPP access and non-3GPP
access in the same AMF, then if a new primary authentication is run, then
the new derived partial 5G NAS security context needs to be taken into use
on this access (access A) with a NAS SMC using the distinct pair of NAS
COUNTs for this access. But the new derived partial 5G NAS security context
also needs to be taken into use on the other accesses (access B) with a NAS
SMC using the distinct pair of NAS COUNTs for the respective access as part
of the NAS procedure as described in clause 6.4.2.2.

When cryptographic protection for radio bearers is established RRC
protection keys and UP protection keys shall be generated as described in
sub-clause 6.2.3.1 while KAMF is assumed to be already available in the
AMF.

The initial NAS message shall be integrity protected by the current 5G NAS
security context if such exists using the distinct pair of NAS COUNTs
together with the NAS connection identifier for this access. If no current
5G NAS security context exists the ME shall signal "no key available" in
the initial NAS message.

KAMF may have been established in the AMF as a result of a primary
authentication run on this access or on a different access, or as a result
of a 5G security context transfer from another AMF during N2 handover or
idle mode mobility.

When the gNB/ng-eNB releases the RRC connection, the UE and the gNB/ng-eNB
shall delete the keys they store such that state in the network for CM-IDLE
state UEs will only be maintained in the AMF.


6.8.1.2.2   Establishment of keys for cryptographically protected radio
         bearers in 3GPP access

This sub-clause applies to establishment of keys for cryptographically
protected radio bearers in 3GPP access only.

The procedure the UE uses to establish cryptographic protection for radio
bearers is initiated by an NAS Service Request message or Registration
Request message with "PDU session(s) to be re-activated" included from the
UE to the AMF. The AMF may initiate the procedure to establish
cryptographic protection for radio bearers when "PDU session(s) to be re-
activated" is not included in the Registration request and but there is
pending downlink UP data or pending downlink signalling.

Upon receipt of the NAS message, if the AMF does not require a NAS SMC
procedure before initiating the NGAP procedure INITIAL CONTEXT SETUP, the
AMF shall derive key KgNB/KeNB as specified in Annex A using the uplink NAS
COUNT (see TS 24.501 [35]) corresponding to the NAS message that initiated
transition from CM-IDLE to CM-CONNECTED state and the KAMF of the current
5G NAS security context.

The AMF shall communicate the KgNB/KeNB to the serving gNB/ng-eNB in the
NGAP procedure INITIAL CONTEXT SETUP. The UE shall derive the KgNB/KeNB
from the KAMF of the current 5G NAS security context using the NAS uplink
COUNT corresponding to the NAS message that initiated transition from CM-
IDLE to CM-CONNECTED state.

As a result of the NAS Service Request or Registration procedure, with "PDU
session(s) to be re-activated" radio bearers are established, and the
gNB/ng-eNB sends an AS SMC to the UE. When the UE receives the AS SMC
without having received a NAS Security Mode Command, it shall use the NAS
uplink COUNT corresponding to the NAS message that initiated transition
from CM-IDLE to CM-CONNECTED state as freshness parameter in the derivation
of the KgNB/KeNB. The KDF as specified in Annex A shall be used for the
KgNB/KeNB derivation using the KAMF of the current 5G NAS security context.
From the KgNB/KeNB the RRC protection keys and the UP protection keys are
derived by the UE and the gNB/ng-eNB as described in sub-clause 6.2.

If the NAS procedure establishing radio bearers contains a primary
authentication run (which is optional), the NAS uplink and downlink COUNT
for the new KAMF shall be set to the start values (i.e. zero). If the NAS
procedure establishing radio bearers contains a NAS SMC (which is
optional), the value of the uplink NAS COUNT corresponding to the most
recent NAS Security Mode Complete shall be used as freshness parameter in
the KgNB/KeNB derivation from fresh KAMF of the current 5G NAS security
context when executing an AS SMC. The KDF as specified in Annex A shall be
used for the KgNB/KeNB derivation also in this case.

The case that the UE is using Control Plane CIoT 5GS optimisation to send
data over NAS and N3 bearers are established (due to either a request from
the UE or decided by the AMF - see 5.31.4 of TS 23.501 [2]) works as
follows. The UE and AMF shall always use the value of the uplink NAS COUNT
from the Control Plane Service Request that was sent to transition the UE
from idle to active as freshness parameter in the derivation of the KeNB
unless there has been a subsequent NAS Security Mode Complete. If there was
a subsequent NAS Security Mode Complete, then the UE and AMF use the value
of the uplink NAS COUNT from the latest NAS Security Mode Complete message
as freshness parameter in the derivation of the KeNB.


6.8.1.2.3   Establishment of keys for cryptographically protected traffic
         in non-3GPP access

In the case of non-3GPP access, there are no individual radio bearers set
up between the UE and N3IWF. For non-3GPP access, an IPsec tunnel is
established between the UE and the interworking function N3IWF. The main SA
is used solely for the transport of NAS messages between the UE and the
AMF/SMF.

Corresponding to the PDU session of the UE, based on the policies and
configuration, N3IWF determines the number of IPsec child SAs to be
established and the QoS profiles associated with each IPsec child SA. For
example, the N3IWF may decide to establish one IPsec child SA and associate
all QoS profiles with this IPsec child SA. In this case, all QoS Flows of
the PDU Session would be transferred over one IPsec child SA. N3IWF may
also decide to establish different child SAs corresponding to the different
QoS flows.

Corresponding to radio bearers in 3GPP access which are mapped to QoS
values, for non-3GPPaccess there are only child SAs mapped to QoS values.
Cryptographically each child SA is different with distinct key materials
exchanged as per RFC 7296 [25].


6.8.1.2.4   Transition from CM-CONNECTED to CM-IDLE

On CM-CONNECTED to CM-IDLE transitions the gNB/ng-eNB does no longer need
to store state information about the corresponding UE.

In particular, on CM-CONNECTED to CM-IDLE transitions:

-  The gNB/ng-eNB and the UE shall release all radio bearers and delete the
AS security context.

-  AMF and the UE shall keep the 5G NAS security context stored.


6.8.1.3  Key handling for the Registration procedure when registered in NG-
         RAN

NOTE:  This clause applies to both 3GPP access and non-3GPP access.

Before the UE can initiate the Registration procedure, the UE needs to
transition to CM-CONNECTED state. The UE shall use the current 5G security
context to protect the Registration Request and include the corresponding
5G-GUTI and ngKSI value. The Registration Request shall be integrity-
protected, but not confidentiality-protected. UE shall use the current 5G
security context algorithms to protect the Registration Request message.
For the case that this security context is non-current in the AMF, the AMF
shall delete any existing current 5G security context and make the used 5G
NAS security context the current 5G security context.

If "PDU session(s) to be re-activated" is included in the Registration
request message or if the AMF chooses to establish radio bearers when there
is pending downlink UP data or pending downlink signalling, radio bearers
will be established as part of the Registration procedure and a KgNB/KeNB
will be derived. If there was no subsequent NAS SMC, the value of the
uplink NAS COUNT, associated with the 3GPP access over which the
Registration request message was sent from the UE to the AMF, is used as
freshness parameter in the KgNB/KeNB derivation using the KDF as specified
in clause Annex A.9.

In the case a primary authentication is run successfully, the uplink and
downlink NAS COUNT shall be set to the start values (i.e. zero).

In the case source and target AMF use different NAS algorithms, the target
AMF re-derives the NAS keys from KAMF with the new algorithm identities as
input and provides the new algorithm identifiers within a NAS SMC. The UE
shall assure that the NAS keys used to verify the integrity of the NAS SMC
are derived using the algorithm identity specified in the NAS SMC.

If there is a NAS Security Mode Command after the Registration Request over
3GPP access, the UE and AMF shall use the value of the uplink NAS COUNT
associated with the 3GPP access of the most recent NAS Security Mode
Complete and the related KAMF as the parameter in the derivation of the
KgNB/KeNB. From this KgNB/KeNB the RRC protection keys and the UP
protection keys are derived as described in sub-clause 6.2.3.1.

In the case of Registration over non-3GPP access, the UE and AMF shall use
the uplink NAS COUNT associated with the non-3GPP access of the most recent
NAS Security Mode Complete and the related KAMF as the parameter in the
derivation of the KN3IWF. IPsec SA is established between the UE and N3IWF
using the KN3IWF as described in sub-clause 7.2.1 of this document.


6.8.2  Security handling at RRC state transitions


6.8.2.1  Security handling at transitions between RRC_INACTIVE and
         RRC_CONNECTED states


6.8.2.1.1   General

In 5G, the RRC_INACTIVE state allows gNB/ng-eNB to suspend the UE's RRC
connection while the gNB/ng-eNB and the UE continue to maintain the UE 5G
AS security context. The UE RRC connection can be resumed at a later time
by allowing the UE to transition into RRC__CONNECTED state. The UE may
transition from RRC_INACTIVE state to RRC_CONNECTED state to the same last
serving gNB/ng-eNB which sent the UE into RRC_INACTIVE state or to a
different gNB/ng-eNB. While the UE is in RRC_INACTIVE state, the UE and
last serving gNB/ng-eNB store the UE 5G AS security context which can be
reactivated when the UE transitions from RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED. The
gNB/ng-eNB and the UE shall behave as defined in following sub-clauses. The
ng-eNB connected to 5GC shall also support the same security handling at
RRC state transitions.


6.8.2.1.2   State transition from RRC_CONNECTED to RRC_INACTIVE

The gNB/ng-eNB shall send to the UE an RRCRelease with suspendConfig
message that is ciphered and integrity protected in PDCP layer using a
current AS security context. The gNB/ng-eNB shall include a fresh I-RNTI,
and an NCC in that RRCRelease with suspendConfig  message. The I-RNTI is
used for context identification, and the UE ID part of the I-RNTI assigned
by the gNB/ng-eNB shall be different in consecutive suspends of the same
UE. This is to avoid tracking of UEs based on the I-RNTI. If the gNB/ng-eNB
has a fresh and unused pair of {NCC, NH}, the gNB/ng-eNB shall include the
NCC in the RRCRelease with suspendConfig  message. Otherwise, the gNB/ng-
eNB shall include the same NCC associated with the current KgNB in the
RRCRelease with suspendConfig  message. The NCC is used for AS security.

The gNB/ng-eNB shall delete the current AS keys KRRCenc, KUPenc (if
available), and KUPint (if available) after sending the RRCRelease with
suspendConfig  message to the UE, but shall keep the current AS key
KRRCint. If the sent NCC value is fresh and belongs to an unused pair of
{NCC, NH}, the gNB/ng-eNB shall save the pair of {NCC, NH} in the current
UE AS security context and shall delete the current AS key KgNB. If the
sent NCC value is equal to the NCC value associated with the current KgNB,
the gNB/ng-eNB shall keep the current AS key KgNB and NCC. The gNB/ng-eNB
shall store the sent I-RNTI together with the current UE context including
the remainder of the AS security context.

Upon receiving the RRC Release with suspendConfig message from the gNB/ng-
eNB, the UE shall verify that the integrity of the received RRCRelease with
suspendConfig  message is correct by checking the PDCP MAC-I. If this
verification is successful, then the UE shall take the received NCC value
and save it as stored NCC with the current UE context. The UE shall delete
the current AS keys KRRCenc, KUPenc (if available), and KUPint (if
available), but keep the current AS key KRRCint key. If the stored NCC
value is different from the NCC value associated with the current KgNB, the
UE shall delete the current AS key KgNB. If the stored NCC is equal to the
NCC value associated with the current KgNB, the UE shall keep the current
AS key KgNB. The UE shall store the received I-RNTI together with the
current UE context including the remainder of the AS security context, for
the next state transition.


6.8.2.1.3   State transition from RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED to a new
         gNB/ng-eNB

When the UE decides to resume the RRC connection to transit from
RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED, the UE sends RRCResumeRequest message on
SRB0 and hence it is not integrity protected. However, the RRCResumeRequest
message shall include the I-RNTI and a ResumeMAC-I/shortResumeMAC-I. The I-
RNTI (short or full I-RNTI) is used for context identification and its
value shall be the same as the I-RNTI that the UE had received from the
source gNB/ng-eNB in the RRCRelease with suspendConfig  message. The
ResumeMAC-I/shortResumeMAC-I is a 16-bit message authentication token, the
UE shall calculate it using the integrity algorithm (NIA or EIA) in the
stored AS security context, which was negotiated between the UE and the
source gNB/ng-eNB and the  current KRRCint with the following inputs:

-  KEY      : it shall be set to current KRRCint;

-  BEARER     : all its bits shall be set to 1.

-  DIRECTION  : its bit shall be set to 1;

-  COUNT    : all its bits shall be set to 1;

-  MESSAGE  : it shall be set to VarResumeMAC-Input/VarShortInactiveMAC-
Input as defined in TS 38.331 [22] for gNB and in TS 36.331 [69] for ng-eNB
with following inputs:

                                source PCI, target Cell-ID, source C-RNTI.



For protection of all RRC messages except RRCReject message following the
sent RRCResumeRequest message, the UE shall derive a KNG-RAN* using the
target PCI, target ARFCN-DL/EARFCN-DL and the KgNB/NH based on either a
horizontal key derivation or a vertical key derivation as defined in clause
6.9.2.1.1 and Annex A.11/Annex A.12. The UE shall further derive KRRCint,
KRRCenc, KUPenc (optionally), and KUPint (optionally) from the newly
derived KNG-RAN*.

When the target gNB/ng-eNB receives the RRCResumeRequest message from the
UE, the target gNB/ng-eNB extracts the I-RNTI from the RRCResumeRequest
message. The target gNB/ng-eNB contacts the source gNB/ng-eNB based on the
information in the I-RNTI by sending an Xn-AP Retrieve UE Context Request
message with the following included: I-RNTI, the ResumeMAC-I/shortResumeMAC-
I and target Cell-ID, in order to allow the source gNB/ng-eNB to validate
the UE request and to retrieve the UE context including the UE 5G AS
security context.

The source gNB/ng-eNB retrieves the stored UE context including the UE 5G
AS security context from its database using the I-RNTI. The source gNB/ng-
eNB verifies the ResumeMAC-I/shortResumeMAC-I using the current KRRCint key
stored in the retrieved UE 5G AS security context (calculating the
ResumeMAC-I/shortResumeMAC-I in the same way as described above). If the
verification of the ResumeMAC-I/shortResumeMAC-I is successful, then the
source gNB/ng-eNB calculates KNG-RAN* using the target cell PCI, target
ARFCN-DL/EARFCN-DL and the KgNB/NH in the current UE 5G AS security context
based on either a horizontal key derivation or a vertical key derivation
according to whether the source gNB/ng-eNB has an unused pair of {NCC, NH}
as described in Annex A.11/Annex A.12. The source gNB/ng-eNB can obtain the
target PCI and target ARFCN-DL/EARFCN-DL from a cell configuration database
by means of the target Cell-ID which was received from the target gNB/ng-
eNB. Then the source gNB/ng-eNB shall respond with an Xn-AP Retrieve UE
Context Response message to the target gNB/ng-eNB including the UE context
that contains the UE 5G AS security context. The UE 5G AS security context
sent to the target gNB/ng-eNB shall include the newly derived KNG-RAN*, the
NCC associated to the KNG-RAN*, the UE 5G security capabilities, UP
security policy, the UP security activation status with the corresponding
PDU session ID(s), and the ciphering and integrity algorithms used by the
UE with the source cell.

The target gNB/ng-eNB shall check if it supports the ciphering and
integrity algorithms the UE used with the last source cell. If the target
gNB/ng-eNB does not support the ciphering and integrity algorithms used in
the last source cell or if the target gNB/ng-eNB prefers to use different
algorithms than the source gNB/ng-eNB, then the target gNB/ng-eNB shall
send an RRC Setup/RRCSetup message on SRB0 to the UE in order to proceed
with RRC connection establishment as if the UE was in RRC_IDLE (i.e., a
fallback procedure).

If the target gNB/ng-eNB supports the ciphering and integrity algorithms
used with the last source cell and these algorithms are the chosen
algorithms by the target gNB/ng-eNB, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall derive new
AS keys (RRC integrity key, RRC encryption key and UP keys) using the
algorithms the UE used with the source cell and the received KNG-RAN*. The
target gNB/ng-eNB shall reset all PDCP COUNTs to 0 and activate the new
keys in PDCP layer. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall respond to the UE with an
RRC Resume message on SRB1 which is integrity protected and ciphered in
PDCP layer using the new RRC keys.

If the UP security activation status can be supported in the target gNB/ng-
eNB, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall use the UP security activations that the
UE used at the last source cell. Otherwise, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall
respond with an RRC Setup message to establish a new RRC connection with
the UE.

When the UE receives the RRCResume message, the UE shall decrypt the
message using the KRRCenc that was derived based on the newly derived KNG-
RAN*. The UE shall also verify the <RRC Connection Resume> message by
verifying the PDCP MAC-I using the KRRCint that was derived from the newly
derived KNG-RAN* If verification of the RRCResume message is successful,
the UE shall delete the current KRRCint key and the UE shall save the
KRRCint, KRRCenc, KUPenc (optionally), and KUPint (optionally) from the
newly derived KNG-RAN* as part of the UE current AS security context. In
this case, the UE shall send the RRCResumeComplete message both integrity
protected and ciphered to the target gNB/ng-eNB on SRB1 using the current
KRRCint and KRRCenc. The UE shall use the UP security activations that were
used before tansition to the RRC Inactive.

If the UE receives RRCReject message from the target gNB/ng-eNB in response
to the UE <RRC Resume Request> message, the UE shall delete newly derived
AS keys used for connection resumption attempt, including newly derived KNG-
RAN*, newly derivedRRC integrity key, RRC encryption key and UP keys, and
keep the current KRRCint and the KgNB/NH in its current AS context.

Security is fully resumed on UE side after reception and processing of
RRCResume message. The UE can receive data on DRB(s) after having received
and processed RRC connection resume message. UL data on DRB(s) can be sent
after RRCResumeComplete message has been successfully sent.

After a successful transition from RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED the target
gNB/ng-eNB shall perform Path Switch procedure with the AMF. The AMF shall
verify the UE security capability as described in the clause 6.7.3.1, and
the SMF shall veirfy the UE security policy as described in the clause
6.6.1.


6.8.2.1.4   State transition from RRC_INACTIVE to RRC_CONNECTED to the same
         gNB/ng-eNB

The target gNB/ng-eNB may be the same as the source gNB/ng-eNB in the
description in the previous subclause. If so, the single gNB/ng-eNB
performs the roles of both the source and target gNB/ng-eNB.


6.8.2.2  Key handling during mobility in RRC_INACTIVE state


6.8.2.2.1   General

The purpose of this procedure is to allow the UE to notify the network if
it moves out of the configured RNA (RAN-based Notification Area) or if UE
initiates a periodic RAN-based notification area update procedure. The UE
and gNB store the AS security context in RRC_INACTIVE state and reactivate
the AS security context when the UE initiates the RAN-based Notification
Area Update (RNAU) procedure. The ng-eNB connected to 5GC shall also
support the same key handling during mobility in RRC_INACTIVE.


6.8.2.2.2   RAN-based notification area update to a new gNB/ng-eNB

When the UE decides to initiate the RANU procedure the UE may initiate the
procedure with a new gNB/ng-eNB. In this case, the UE, the target gNB/ng-
eNB and the source gNB/ng-eNB follow the detailed procedure as described in
clause 6.8.2.1.3 with the following deviations:

The target gNB/ng-eNB shall check if it supports the ciphering and
integrity algorithms the UE used with the last source cell. If the target
gNB/ng-eNB does not support the ciphering and integrity algorithms used in
the last source cell or if the target gNB/ng-eNB prefers to use different
algorithms than the source gNB/ng-eNB, then the target gNB/ng-eNB shall
send an RRCSetup message on SRB0 to the UE in order to proceed with RRC
connection establishment as if the UE was in RRC_IDLE (i.e., fallback
procedure).

If the target gNB/ng-eNB selects the ciphering and integrity protection
algorithms which the UE used with the last source cell and the target
gNB/ng-eNB decides to send the UE directly back to RRC_INACTIVE state
without bringing the UE to RRC_CONNECTED state, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall
perform a Path Switch procedure with the AMF to get a fresh {NCC, NH} pair
before sending the RRCRelease message to the UE. After the target gNB/ng-
eNB receives a fresh {NCC, NH} pair in the Path Switch Acknowledgement
message from the AMF, the target gNB/ng-eNB shall set the value of NCC in
the RRCRelease message to the NCC value of the received fresh {NCC, NH}
pair.

After the source gNB/ng-eNB (old gNB/ng-eNB) validates the ResumeMAC-
I/shortResumeMAC-I received from the target gNB/ng-eNB (new gNB/ng-eNB) in
the RETRIEVE UE CONTEXT REQUEST message, the old gNB/ng-eNB may decide not
to relocate the UE context to the new gNB/ng-eNB. In this case, the old
gNB/ng-eNB builds the RRCRelease message (MSG4) with a fresh I-RNTI,
integrity protect it and encrypt it using the RRC keys that were derived
from the new KgNB* similar to RRCResume message (MSG4) protection as
specified in clause 6.8.2.1.3. Then, the old gNB/ng-eNB sends the integrity
protected and encrypted RRCRelease message to the new gNB/ng-eNB in the
RETRIEVE UE CONTEXT FAILURE message.


6.8.2.2.3   RAN-based notification area update to the same gNB/ng-eNB

When the UE decides to initiate a periodic RNAU procedure, the target
gNB/ng-eNB may be the same as the source gNB/ng-eNB. If so the single
gNB/ng-eNB (same gNB/ng-eNB) performs the roles of both the source gNB/ng-
eNB and the target gNB/ng-eNB.


6.9  Security handling in mobility


6.9.1  Void


6.9.2  Key handling in handover


6.9.2.1  General


6.9.2.1.1   Access stratum

The general principle of key handling for KNG-RAN*/NH at handovers is
depicted in Figure 6.9.2.1.1-1.

[pic]

Figure 6.9.2.1.1-1: Model for the handover key chaining

The following is an outline of the key handling model to clarify the
intended structure of the key derivations. The detailed specification is
provided in sub-clauses 6.9.2.2 and 6.9.2.3.

Whenever an initial AS security context needs to be established between UE
and gNB/ng-eNB, AMF and the UE shall derive a KgNB and a Next Hop parameter
(NH). The KgNB and the NH are derived from the KAMF. A NH Chaining Counter
(NCC) is associated with each KgNB and NH parameter. Every KgNB is
associated with the NCC corresponding to the NH value from which it was
derived. At initial setup, the KgNB is derived directly from KAMF, and is
then considered to be associated with a virtual NH parameter with NCC value
equal to zero. At initial setup, the derived NH value is associated with
the NCC value one.

NOTE 1:  At the UE, the NH derivation associated with NCC=1 could be
delayed until the first handover performing vertical key derivation.

NOTE 1a: In N2 handover, when the KgNB is updated either due to KAMF change
or synchronising the AS security context with the NAS security context, the
KgNB is derived as specified in clauses 6.9.2.3.3 and 6.9.2.3.4 of the
present document. In inter-RAT handover, the KgNB is derived as specified
in clause 8.4 of the present document. In UE context modification, the KgNB
is derived as specified in clause 6.9.2.2.

Whether the AMF sends the KgNB key or the {NH, NCC} pair to the serving
gNB/ng-eNB is described in detail in sub-clauses 6.9.2.2 and 6.9.2.3. The
AMF shall not send the NH value to gNB/ng-eNB at the initial connection
setup. The gNB/ng-eNB shall initialize the NCC value to zero after
receiving NGAP Initial Context Setup Request message.

NOTE 2:  Since the AMF does not send the NH value to gNB/ng-eNB at the
initial connection setup, the NH value associated with the NCC value one
cannot be used in the next Xn handover or the next intra-gNB/intra-ng-eNB-
CU handover, for the next Xn handover or the next intra-gNB-CU/intra-ng-eNB
handover the horizontal key derivation (see Figure 6.9.2.1.1-1) will apply.

NOTE 3:  One of the rules specified for the AMF in sub-clause 6.9.2.3.3 of
the present document states that the AMF always computes a fresh {NH, NCC}
pair that is given to the target gNB/ng-eNB. An implication of this is that
the first {NH, NCC} pair will never be used to derive a KgNB. It only
serves as an initial value for the NH chain.

The UE and the gNB/ng-eNB use the KgNB to secure the communication between
each other. On handovers and at transitions from RRC_INACTIVE to
RRC_CONNECTED states (defined in clause 6.8.2.1), the basis for the KgNB
that will be used between the UE and the target gNB/ng-eNB, called KNG-
RAN*, is derived from either the currently active KgNB or from the NH
parameter. If KNG-RAN* is derived from the currently active KgNB this is
referred to as a horizontal key derivation (see Figure 6.9.2.1.1-1) and if
the KNG-RAN* is derived from the NH parameter the derivation is referred to
as a vertical key derivation (see Figure 6.9.2.1.1-1).

As NH parameters are only computable by the UE and the AMF, it is arranged
so that NH parameters are provided to gNB/ng-eNBs from the AMF in such a
way that forward security can be achieved.

On handovers with vertical key derivation the NH is further bound to the
target PCI and its frequency ARFCN-DL before it is taken into use as the
KgNB in the target gNB/ng-eNB. On handovers with horizontal key derivation
the currently active KgNB is further bound to the target PCI and its
frequency ARFCN-DL before it is taken into use as the KgNB in the target
gNB/ng-eNB.


6.9.2.1.2   Non access stratum

During mobility, NAS aspects that need to be considered are the possible
KAMF change, the possible NAS algorithm change at AMF change, and the
possible presence of a parallel NAS connection. There is the possibility
that the source AMF and the target AMF do not support the same set of NAS
algorithms or have different priorities regarding the use of NAS
algorithms. In this case, the target AMF re-derives the NAS keys from the
existing KAMF (if unchanged) or derives the NAS keys from the new KAMF (if
changed) using the NAS algorithm identities and NAS algorithm types as
input to the NAS key derivation functions (see Annex A.8). When the KAMF
has not changed, all inputs, in particular the KAMF, will be the same in
the re-derivation except for the NAS algorithm identity. When the KAMF has
changed, new NAS keys are derived irrespective of change in NAS algorithms.

In case the KAMF has changed or the target AMF decides to use NAS
algorithms different from the ones used by the source AMF, the target AMF
shall provide needed parameters to the UE as defined in Clause 6.9.2.3.3
for N2-Handover (i.e., using NAS Container) and Clause 6.9.3 for mobility
registration update (i.e., using NAS SMC).

NOTE 1:  It is per operator's policy how to configure selection of handover
types. Depending on an operator's security requirements, the operator can
decide whether to have Xn or N2 handovers for a particular gNB/ng-eNB
according to the security characteristics of a particular gNB/ng-eNB.

NOTE 2:  Following key change indicators are involved with N2 handovers. 1)
Source AMF indicates AS key re-keying required meaning that the KAMF sent
by source AMF to the target AMF is not in sync with current gNB/ng-eNB with
keyAmfChangeInd (KAMF Change Indicator). 2) Source AMF indicates that the
KAMF sent by source AMF to target AMF has been calculated using horizontal
KAMF derivation with keyAmfHDerivationInd  (KAMF Horizontal Derivation
Indicator). 3) The target AMF indicates a horizontal KAMF derivation to the
UE with K_AMF_change_flag in the NAS Container to tell the NAS layer of the
UE to change KAMF. 4). The target AMF indicates anAS key re-keying  to the
gNB/ng-eNB with NSCI (New Security Context Indicator). 5) The gNB/ng-eNB
indicates a AS re-keying to the UE with keySetChangeIndicator so that the
AS layer of the UE knows that new KgNB needs to be derived from new KAMF
instead of NH, and NCC needs to be reset to zero.


6.9.2.2  Key derivations for context modification procedure

As outlined in clause 6.9.2.1, whenever a fresh KgNB is calculated from the
KAMF, the AMF shall transfer the KgNB to the serving ng-eNB/gNB in a
message modifying the security context in the ng-eNB/gNB. The AMF and the
UE shall compute the fresh KgNB as defined in Annex A.9 according to the
rules in clause 6.9.6.4. An NCC value 0 is associated with the fresh KgNB.
From the fresh KgNB, the ng-eNB/gNB and the UE shall compute the KNG-RAN*
as described in Annex A.11 and A.12  and then use the computed KNG-RAN*  as
the KgNB/KeNB as described in clause 6.9.4.4.

NOTE 1: Unlike EPS, in 5GS the NAS and the AS security contexts are
synchronized as a part of handover procedure, if a handover is occurring.
See sub-clauses under the clause 6.9.2.3 (key derivations during handover)
of the present document.


6.9.2.3  Key derivations during handover


6.9.2.3.1   Intra-gNB-CU handover and intra-ng-eNB handover

The gNB shall have a policy deciding at which intra-gNB -CU handovers the
KgNB can be retained and at which a new KgNB needs to be derived. At an
intra-gNB-CU handover, the gNB shall indicate to the UE whether to change
or retain the current KgNB in the HO Command message. Retaining the current
KgNB shall only be done during intra-gNB-CU handover.

NOTE:  The option of retaining the KeNB at intra-ng-eNB handover is not
supported in ng-eNB.

If the current KgNB is to be changed, the gNB/ng-eNB and the UE shall
derive a KNG-RAN* as in Annex A.11/A.12 using target PCI, its frequency
ARFCN-DL/EARFCN-DL, and either NH or the current KgNB depending on the
following criteria: the gNB shall use the NH for deriving KNG-RAN* if an
unused {NH, NCC} pair is available in the gNB (this is referred to as a
vertical key derivation), otherwise if no unused {NH, NCC} pair is
available in the gNB, the gNB shall derive KNG-RAN* from the current KgNB
(this is referred to as a horizontal key derivation). The gNB shall send
the NCC used for the KNG-RAN*derivation to UE in HO Command message. The
gNB/ng-eNB and the UE shall use the KNG-RAN* as the KgNB, after handover.

If the current KgNB is to be retained, the gNB and the UE shall continue
using the current KgNB, after handover.

NOTE 1:  This clause is also applicable when gNB is implemented as a single
unit, i.e., when the gNB is not split into CU and DU.

NOTE 2: The key derivation mechanism described in this clause is also
applicable to CHOdefined in TS 38.300[52].


6.9.2.3.2   Xn-handover

In Xn handovers the source gNB/ng-eNB shall perform a vertical key
derivation in case it has an unused {NH, NCC} pair. The source gNB/ng-eNB
shall first compute KNG-RAN* from target PCI, its frequency ARFCN-DL/EARFCN-
DL, and either from currently active KgNB in case of horizontal key
derivation or from the NH in case of vertical key derivation as described
in Annex A.11/A.12.

Next, the source gNB/ng-eNB shall forward the { KNG-RAN*, NCC} pair to the
target gNB/ng-eNB. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall use the received KNG-RAN*
directly as KgNB to be used with the UE. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall
associate the NCC value received from source gNB/ng-eNB with the KgNB. The
target gNB/ng-eNB shall include the received NCC into the prepared HO
Command message, which is sent back to the source gNB/ng-eNB in a
transparent container and forwarded to the UE by source gNB/ng-eNB.

When the target gNB/ng-eNB has completed the handover signalling with the
UE, it shall send a NGAP PATH SWITCH REQUEST message to the AMF. Upon
reception of the NGAP PATH SWITCH REQUEST, the AMF shall increase its
locally kept NCC value by one and compute a new fresh NH from its stored
data using the function defined in Annex A.10. The AMF shall use the KAMF
from the currently active 5G NAS security context for the computation of
the new fresh NH. The AMF shall then send the newly computed {NH, NCC} pair
to the target gNB/ng-eNB in the NGAP PATH SWITCH REQUEST ACKNOWLEDGE
message. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall store the received {NH, NCC} pair for
further handovers and remove other existing unused stored {NH, NCC} pairs
if any.

If the AMF had activated a new 5G NAS security context with a new KAMF,
different from the 5G NAS security context on which the currently active 5G
AS security context is based, but has not yet successfully performed a UE
Context Modification procedure, the sent NGAP PATH SWITCH REQUEST
ACKNOWLEDGE message shall in addition contain a NSCI (New Security Context
Indicator). The AMF shall in this case derive a new initial KgNB from the
new KAMF and the uplink NAS COUNT in the most recent NAS Security Mode
Complete message as specified in Annex A.9. The AMF shall associate the
derived new initial KgNB with a new NCC value equal to zero. Then, the AMF
shall use {the derived new initial KgNB, the new NCC value initialized to
zero} pair as the newly computed {NH, NCC} pair to be sent in the NGAP PATH
SWITCH REQUEST ACKNOWLEDGE message. The gNB/ng-eNB shall in this case set
the value of keySetChangeIndicator field to true in further handovers. The
gNB/ng-eNB should in this case perform an intra-gNB-CU/intra-ng-eNB
handover immediately .

NOTE 1:  Because the NGAP PATH SWITCH REQUEST message is transmitted after
the radio link handover, it can only be used to provide keying material for
the next handover procedure. Thus, for Xn-handovers key separation happens
only after two hops because the source gNB/ng-eNB knows the target gNB/ng-
eNB keys. The target gNB/ng-eNB can immediately initiate an intra-gNB-
CU/intra-ng-eNB handover to take the new NH into use once the new NH has
arrived in the PATH SWITCH REQUEST ACKNOWLEDGE message.

NOTE 2: The key derivation mechanism described in this clause is also
applicable to CHOdefined in TS 38.300[52].


6.9.2.3.3   N2-Handover

Upon reception of the NGAP HANDOVER REQUIRED message, if the source AMF
does not change the active KAMF (meaning no horizontal KAMF derivation) and
if AS key re-keying is not required, the source AMF shall increment its
locally kept NCC value by one and compute a fresh NH from its stored data
using the function defined in Annex A.10. The source AMF shall use the KAMF
from the currently active 5GS NAS security context for the computation of
the fresh NH. The source AMF shall send the fresh {NH, NCC} pair to the
target AMF in the Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request message. The
Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request message shall in addition
contain the KAMF that was used to compute the fresh {NH, NCC} pair and its
corresponding ngKSI and corresponding uplink and downlink NAS COUNTs.

If the source AMF had activated a new 5G NAS security context with a new
KAMF, different from the 5G NAS security context on which the currently
active 5G AS security context is based, but has not yet performed a UE
Context Modification procedure, the Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext
Request message shall in addition contain an indication that the KAMF sent
by source AMF to target AMF is not in sync with the current KgNB used
between the UE and the source gNB (i.e., keyAmfChangeInd) which means that
AS key re-keying is required at the UE. Further, the source AMF shall
derive a new KgNB associated with NCC=0 using the new KAMF and the uplink
NAS COUNT from the last successful NAS SMC procedure with the UE and
provide the {NH= newly derived KgNB, NCC=0} pair to the target AMF in the
Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request message.

The source AMF uses its local policy to determine whether to perform
horizontal KAMF derivation on currently active KAMF. If horizontal KAMF
derivation is performed, the Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request
shall contain an indication (i.e., keyAmfHDerivationInd ) that the new KAMF
has been calculated, an indication (i.e., keyAmfChangeInd) that AS key re-
keying is required at the UE, and the downlink NAS COUNT used in the
horizontal derivation of the sent KAMF. The ngKSI for the newly derived
KAMF key has the same value and the same type as the ngKSI of the current
KAMF. Further, the source AMF shall derive a new KgNB associated with NCC=0
using the newly derived KAMF and the uplink NAS COUNT value of 232-1 as
defined in Annex A.9. The source AMF shall include the{NH=newly derived
KgNB, NCC=0} pair and the ngKSI for the newly derived KAMF key in the
Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request as well.

NOTE a:  The uplink NAS COUNT value for the initial KgNB derivation is set
to 232-1. The reason for choosing such a value is to avoid any possibility
that the value may be used to derive the same KgNB again.

The source AMF shall always increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one after
sending the Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request message to the
target AMF.

Unlike the S10 FORWARD RELOCATION REQUEST message in EPS, the
Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request message in 5G shall not contain
data and meta-data related to old 5G security context.

NOTE 1:  Void.

If the target AMF receives the indication of horizontal KAMF derivation
(i.e., keyAmfHDerivationInd), it shall derive the NAS keys from the
received KAMF as specified in clause A.8 and set the NAS COUNTs to zero.
The target AMF shall create a NASC (NAS Container) containing the
K_AMF_change_flag, the received downlink NAS COUNT, ngKSI, selected NAS
security algorithms, and NAS MAC. The K_AMF_change_flag is set to one when
the target AMF receives keyAmfHDerivationInd_. Otherwise, the
K_AMF_change_flag is set to zero. If the target AMF does not receive
keyAmfHDerivationInd but wants to change the NAS algorithms, it shall
create a NASC using the selected NAS security algorithms in the same manner
as the case for the horizontal KAMF derivation. However, the target AMF
shall not set the NAS COUNTs to zero.

The target AMF shall calculate a 32-bit NAS MAC over the parameters
included in the NASC using the KNASint key. The input parameters to the NAS
128-bit integrity algorithms as described in Annex D.3 shall be set as
follows when calculating NAS MAC.

The calculation of NAS MAC shall be the 32-bit output of the selected NIA
and shall use the following inputs:

-  KEY      : it shall be set to the corresponding KNASint;

-  COUNT    : it shall be set to 232-1;

-  MESSAGE  : it shall be set to the content of NAS Container as defined in
TS 24.501 [35];

-  DIRECTION  : its bit shall be set to 1; and

-  BEARER     : it shall be set to the value of the NAS connection
identifier for 3GPP access.

The use of the 232-1 as the value of the COUNT for the purpose of NAS MAC
calculation/verification does not actually set the NAS COUNT to 232-1. The
reason for choosing such a value not in the normal NAS COUNT range, i.e.,
[0, 224-1] is to avoid any possibility that the value may be reused for
normal NAS messages.

Replay protection is achieved by the UE checking if the downlink NAS COUNT
included in the NAS Container is replayed or not. The UE shall not accept
the same downlink NAS COUNT value twice before a newly derived KAMF is
taken into use and the corresponding downlink NAS COUNT is set to zero. The
target AMF shall increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one after creating a
NASC.

The NASC is included in the NGAP HANDOVER REQUEST message to the target ng-
eNB/gNB. The purpose of this NASC could be compared to a NAS SMC message.
If the target AMF receives the keyAmfChangeInd, it shall further send the
received {NCC, NH} pair and the New Security Context Indicator (NSCI) to
the target ng-eNB/gNB within the NGAP HANDOVER REQUEST message. The target
AMF shall further set the NCC to one and shall further compute a NH as
specified in Annex A.10. The target AMF shall further store the {NCC=1, NH}
pair.

NOTE 1a: VoidNOTE 2: The NAS Container (NASC) is defined as Intra N1 mode
NAS transparent container in TS 24.501 [35].

NOTE 3: The downlink NAS COUNT is always included in the
Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request and used by the target AMF for
NAS MAC computation. This provides replay protection for NASC.

If the target AMF does not receive the keyAmfChangeInd, it shall store
locally the KAMF and {NH, NCC} pair received from the source AMF and then
send the received {NH, NCC} pair to the target ng-eNB/gNB within the NGAP
HANDOVER REQUEST message.

Upon receipt of the NGAP HANDOVER REQUEST message from the target AMF, the
target ng-eNB/gNB shall compute the KNG-RAN* to be used with the UE by
performing the key derivation defined in Annex A.11 and A.12 with the {NH,
NCC} pair received in the NGAP HANDOVER REQUEST message and the target PCI
and its frequency ARFCN-DL/EARFCN-DL. The gNB uses the KNG-RAN*
corresponding to the selected cell as KgNB. The ng-eNB uses the KNG-RAN*
corresponding to the selected cell as KeNB. The target ng-eNB/gNB shall
associate the NCC value received from AMF with the KgNB/KeNB. The target ng-
eNB/gNB shall include the NCC value from the received {NH, NCC} pair, and
the NASC if such was also received, into the HO Command message to the UE
and remove any existing unused stored {NH, NCC} pairs. If the target ng-
eNB/gNB had received the NSCI, it shall set the keySetChangeIndicator field
in the HO Command message to true.

NOTE 4:  The source AMF may be the same as the target AMF in the
description in this sub-clause. If so the single AMF performs the roles of
both the source and target AMF. In this case, actions related to N14
messages are handled internally in the single AMF.


6.9.2.3.4   UE handling

The UE behaviour is the same regardless if the handover is intra-gNB-CU,
intra ng-eNB, Xn, or N2 with the exception that during intra-gNB-CU
handover, the UE may retain the same key based on an indication from the
gNB. The UE behaviour is also same in case of conditional handover, as
specified in TS 38.300 [52], i.e., the UE shall use the parameters of the
selected target cell in KNG-RAN* derivations.

If the UE also receives a NASC (NAS Container) in the HO Command message,
the UE shall update its NAS security context as follows:

NOTE 1: The purpose of this NASC could be compared to a NAS SMC message.

-  The UE shall verify the freshness of the downlink NAS COUNT in the NASC.


-  If the NASC indicates a new KAMF has been calculated (i.e.,
K_AMF_change_flag is one),

-  The UE shall compute the horizontally derived KAMF using the KAMF from
the current 5G NAS security context identified by the ngKSI included in the
NASC and the downlink NAS COUNT in the NASC, as specified in Annex A.13.

-  The UE shall assign the ngKSI included in the NASC to the ngKSI of the
new derived KAMF. The UE shall further configure NAS security based on the
horizontally derived KAMF and the selected NAS security algorithms in the
NASC.

-  The UE shall further verify the NAS MAC in the NASC as described in
Clause 6.9.2.3.3 and if the verification is successful, the UE shall
further set the NAS COUNTs to zero.

-  If KAMF change is not indicated,

-  If the verification is successful, the UE shall configure the NAS
security based on the parameters included in the NASC but shall not set the
NAS COUNTs to zero.

-  The UE shall verify the NAS MAC in the NASC.

-  The UE shall further set the downlink NAS COUNT value of the currently
active NAS security context to the received downlink NAS COUNT value in the
NASC.

If verification of the NASC fails, the UE shall abort the handover
procedure. Furthermore, the UE shall discard the new NAS security context
if it was derived and continue to use the existing NAS and AS security
contexts.

If keySetChangeIndicator in the HO command is true

-  If the HO Command message contained a NASC parameter with the
K_AMF_change_flag set to one:

-  The UE shall use the horizontally derived KAMF and the NAS COUNT value
of 232-1 in the derivation of the temporary KgNB. The UE shall further
process this temporary key as described in subclause 6.9.4.4.

-  Else:

-  The UE handling related to key derivation shall be done as defined in
clause 6.9.4.4.

Else

-  If the NCC value the UE received in the HO Command message from target
ng-eNB/gNB via source ng-eNB/gNB is equal to the NCC value associated with
the currently active KgNB/KeNB, the UE shall derive the KNG-RAN* from the
currently active KgNB/KeNB and the target PCI and its frequency ARFCN-
DL/EARFCN-DL using the function defined in Annex A.11 and A.12.

-  If the UE received an NCC value that was different from the NCC
associated with the currently active KgNB/KeNB, the UE shall first
synchronize the locally kept NH parameter by computing the function defined
in Annex A.10 iteratively (and increasing the NCC value until it matches
the NCC value received from the source ng-eNB/gNB via the HO command
message. When the NCC values match, the UE shall compute the KNG-RAN* from
the synchronized NH parameter and the target PCI and its frequency ARFCN-
DL/EARFCN-DL using the function defined in Annex A.11 and A.12.

The UE shall use the KNG-RAN* as the KgNB when communicating with the
target gNB and as the KeNB when communicating with the target ng-eNB.


6.9.3  Key handling in mobility registration update

The procedure shall be invoked by the target AMF after the receiving of a
Registration Request message of type mobility registration update from the
UE wherein the UE and the source AMF are identified by means of a temporary
identifier 5G-GUTI.

The protocol steps for the source AMF and target AMF performing context
transfer are as follows:

a) The target AMF sends a message to the source AMF, this message contains
the 5G-GUTI, the Access Type and the received Registration Request message.

b) The source AMF searches the data of the UE in the database and checks
the integrity protection on the Registration Request message. The source
AMF uses the 5G NAS security context corresponding to the Access Type to
perform the integrity check.

i) If the UE is found and the integrity check succeeds, when the source AMF
does not change KAMF according to its local policy, the source AMF shall
send a response back that:

-  shall include the SUPI, and

-  may include any current 5G security context it holds.

ii)  If the UE is found and the integrity check succeeds, when the source
AMF changes KAMF according to its local policy, the source AMF shall send a
response back that:

       -  shall include the SUPI,

-  keyAmfHDerivationInd, and

-  may include a new 5G security context it derives from the current one it
holds.

The source AMF subsequently deletes the 5G security context which it holds.

If the UE cannot be identified or the integrity check fails, then the
source AMF shall send a response indicating that the temporary identifier
5G-GUTI cannot be retrieved.

c) If the target AMF receives a response with a SUPI, it creates an entry
and stores the 5G security context that may have beenreceived .

If the target AMF receives a response indicating that the UE could not be
identified, it shall initiate the subscription identification procedure
described in clause 6.12.4 of the present document.

NOTE:  Void.

NOTE 1: The source AMF does not have KSEAF because it is deleted after KAMF
derivationas per clause 6.2.2.1 and therefore the context transfer from
the source AMF to the target AMF does not contain KSEAF.

At mobility registration update, the source AMF shall use local policy to
determine whether to perform horizontal KAMF derivation. If the source AMF
determines not to perform horizontal KAMF derivation, the source AMF shall
transfer current security context to the target AMF. If the source AMF
determines to perform horizontal KAMF derivation, the source AMF shall
derive a new key KAMF from the currently active KAMF and the uplink NAS
COUNT value in the received Registration Request message. The ngKSI for the
newly derived KAMF key is defined such as the value field and the type
field are taken from the ngKSI of the current KAMF. The source AMF shall
transfer the new KAMF, the new ngKSI, the UE security capability, the
keyAmfHDerivationInd to the target AMF. The key derivation of the new KAMF
is specified in Annex A.13. If the source AMF has derived a new key KAMF,
the source AMF shall not transfer the old KAMF to the target AMF and the
source AMF shall in this case also delete any stored non-current 5G
security context, and not transfer any non-current 5G security context to
the target AMF.

When the target AMF receives the new KAMF together with the
keyAmfHDerivationInd, then the target AMF shall decide whether to use the
KAMF directly according to its local policy after receiving the response
from the source AMF.

If the target AMF, according to its local policy, decides to not use the
KAMF received from the source AMF, it can perform a re-authentication
procedure to the UE to establish a new NAS security context.

If the target AMF decides to use the key KAMF received from source AMF
(i.e., no re-authentication), it shall send the  K_AMF_change_flag set to 1
to the UE in the NAS SMC including replayed UE security capabilities, the
selected NAS algorithms and the ngKSI for identifying the new KAMF from
which the UE shall derive a new KAMF to establish a new NAS security
context between the UE and target AMF.

The target AMF shall reset the NAS COUNTs to zero and derive new NAS keys
(KNASint and KNASenc) from the new KAMF using the selected NAS algorithm
identifiers as input. The target AMF shall integrity protect the NAS
Security Mode Command message with the new KNASint key.

If the UE receives the  K_AMF_change_flag set to 1 in the NAS Security Mode
Command message, then the UE shall derive a new key KAMF from the current
active KAMF identified by the received ngKSI in the NAS Security Mode
Command message using the uplink NAS COUNT valuethat was sent in the
Registration Request message. The UE shall assign the received ngKSI in the
NAS Security Mode Command message to the ngKSI of the new derived KAMF. The
UE shall derive new NAS keys (KNASint and KNASenc) from the new KAMF and
integrity check the NAS Security Mode Command message using the new KNASint
key.

The UE shall then derive a new initial KgNB from the new KAMF as specified
in Annex A.9.

The UE shall associate the derived new initial KgNB with a new NCC value
equal to zero and reset the NAS COUNTs to zero.

After the ongoing mobility registration procedure is successfully
completed, the ME shall replace the currently stored KAMF and ngKSI values
on both USIM and ME with the new KAMF and the associated ngKSI.


6.9.4  Key-change-on-the-fly


6.9.4.1  General

Key change on-the-fly consists of key refresh or key re-keying.

Key refresh shall be possible for KgNB, KRRC-enc, KRRC-int, KUP-enc, and
KUP-int (if available ) and shall be initiated by the gNB/ng-eNB when a
PDCP COUNTs are about to be re-used with the same Radio Bearer identity and
with the same KgNB. The procedure is described in clause 6.9.4.5.

Key re-keying shall be possible for the KgNB, KRRC-enc, KRRC-int, KUP-enc,
and KUP-int (if available). This re-keying shall be initiated by the AMF
when a 5G AS security context different from the currently active one shall
be activated. The procedures for doing this are described in clause
6.9.4.4.

AS Key change on-the-fly is accomplished using a procedure based on intra-
cell handover. The following AS key changes on-the-fly shall be possible:
local KgNB refresh (performed when PDCP COUNTs are about to wrap around),
KgNB re-keying performed after an AKA run, activation of a native context
after handover from E-UTRAN.

Key re-keying shall be possible for KNAS-enc and KNAS-int. Re-keying of
KNAS-enc and KNAS-int shall be initiated by the AMF when a 5G NAS security
context different from the currently active one shall be activated. The
procedures for doing this are described in clause 6.9.4.2.

Re-keying of the entire 5G key hierarchy including KAMF shall be achieved
by first re-keying KAMF, then KNAS-enc and KNAS-int, followed by re-keying
of the KgNB and derived keys. For NAS key change on-the-fly, activation of
NAS keys is accomplished by a NAS SMC procedure.


6.9.4.2  NAS key re-keying

After a primary authentication has taken place, new NAS keys from a new
KAMF shall be derived, according to Annex A.8.

To re-activate a non-current full native 5G security context after handover
from E-UTRAN the UE and the AMF take the NAS keys into use by running a NAS
SMC procedure according to clause 6.7.2.

AMF shall activate fresh NAS keys from a primary authentication run or
activate native security context, which has a sufficiently low NAS COUNT
values, before the NAS uplink or downlink COUNT wraps around with the
current security context.


6.9.4.3  NAS key refresh

If the AMF determines that NAS key refresh is required due to e.g. uplink
or downlink NAS counter in the current security context is about to wrap
around or based on a local operator policy to refresh the NAS keys after a
certain time, the AMF may trigger a primary authentication run or may
derive a new KAMF key using horizontal KAMF derivation upon the reception
of an initial NAS message, e.g. a Registration Request or a Service Request
using the uplink NAS COUNT value in the initial NAS message as described in
clause 6.9.3 for mobility update registration. The AMF resets the
corresponding uplink and downlink NAS counters and derive new NAS keys from
the new KAMF key and the algorithms in use. The AMF activates the new KAMF
key by running a NAS SMC with UE according to clause 6.7.2. When the new
KAMF key is horizontally derived, the UE shall use the uplink NAS COUNT
value that was sent in the initial NAS message to derive the same KAMF key
as the AMF, reset the corresponding uplink and downlink NAS counters and
then derive new NAS keys from the KAMF and the algorithms in use.

In this case, if AS security is also established between the UE and gNB/ng-
eNB, then the AMF and the UE shall derive a new initial KgNB from the new
KAMF as specified in Annex A.9. Further, the AMF and the UE shall associate
the derived new initial KgNB with a new NCC value equal to zero. Further,
the derived new initial KgNB/KeNB is sent by the AMF to the gNB/ng-eNB
triggering the gNB/ng-eNB to perform the AS key re-keying as described in
clause 6.9.4.4.


6.9.4.4  AS key re-keying

The KgNB/KeNB re-keying procedure is initiated by the AMF. It may be used
under the following conditions:

-  after a successful AKA run with the UE as part of activating a partial
native 5G security context; or

-  as part of synchronizing the NAS and the AS security contexts as a part
of handover procedure, if a handover is occuring; or

-  as part of re-activating a non-current full native 5G security context
after handover from E-UTRAN according to  clause 8.4; or

-  to create a new KgNB from the current KAMF.

NOTE 1: To perform a key change on-the-fly of the entire key hierarchy, the
AMF has to change the 5G NAS security context before changing the 5G AS
security context.

In order to be able to re-key the KgNB, the AMF requires a fresh uplink NAS
COUNT from a successful NAS SMC procedure with the UE. In the case of
creating a new KgNB from the current KAMF a NAS SMC procedure shall be run
first to provide this fresh uplink NAS COUNT. This NAS SMC procedure does
not have to change other parameters in the current EPS NAS security
context. The AMF derives the new KgNB using the key derivation function as
specified in Annex  A.9 using the KAMF and the uplink NAS COUNT used in the
most recent NAS Security Mode Complete message. The derived new KgNB is
sent to the gNB/ng-eNB in an NGAP UE CONTEXT MODIFICATION REQUEST message
triggering the gNB/ng-eNB to perform the AS key re-keying. The gNB/ng-eNB
runs the key change on-the-fly procedure with the UE. During this procedure
the gNB/ng-eNB shall indicate to the UE that a key change on-the-fly is
taking place. The procedure used is based on an intra-cell handover, and
hence the same KgNB derivation steps shall be taken as in a normal handover
procedure. The gNB/ng-eNB shall indicate to the UE to change the current
KgNB in intra-cell handover during this procedure. Network-side handling of
AS key re-keying that occur as a part of Xn and N2 handovers are described
is defined in clauses 6.9.2.3.2 and 6.9.2.3.3 of the present document.

When the UE receives an indication that the procedure is a key change on-
the-fly procedure, the UE shall derive a temporary KgNB by applying the key
derivation function as specified in Annex A.9 using the KAMF from the
current 5G NAS security context and the uplink NAS COUNT in the most recent
NAS Security Mode Complete message. UE-side handling of AS key re-keying
that occur as a part of Xn and N2 handovers is described in clause
6.9.2.3.4 of the present document.

From this temporary KgNB the UE shall derive the KNG-RAN* as normal (see
Annex A.11/A.12). The gNB/ng-eNB shall take the KgNB it received from the
AMF, which is equal to the temporary KgNB, as basis for its KNG-RAN*
derivations. From this step onwards, the key derivations continue as in a
normal handover.

If the AS level re-keying fails, then the AMF shall complete another NAS
security mode procedure before initiating a new AS level re-keying. This
ensures that a fresh KgNB is used.

The NH parameter shall be handled according to the following rules:

-  The UE, AMF, and gNB/ng-eNB shall delete any old NH upon completion of
the context modification.

-  The UE and AMF shall use the KAMF from the currently active 5G NAS
security context for the computation of the fresh NH. The computation of NH
parameter value sent in the Namf_Communication_CreateUEContext Request,
NGAP HANDOVER REQUEST, and NGAP PATH SWITCH REQUEST ACKNOWLEDGE messages
shall be done according to clauses 6.9.2.3.2 and 6.9.2.3.3.


6.9.4.5  AS key refresh

This procedure is based on an intra-cell handover. The KgNB chaining that
is performed during a handover ensures that the KgNB is re-freshed with
respect to the RRC and UP COUNT after the procedure. The gNB/ng-eNB shall
indicate to the UE to change the current KgNB in intra-cell handover during
this procedure.


6.9.5  Rules on concurrent running of security procedures


6.9.5.1  Rules related to AS and NAS security context synchronization

Concurrent runs of security procedures may, in certain situations, lead to
mismatches between security contexts in the network and the UE. In order to
avoid such mismatches, the following rules shall be adhered to:

1. AMF shall not initiate any of the N2 procedures including a new key
towards a UE if a NAS Security Mode Command procedure is ongoing with the
UE.

2. The AMF shall not initiate a NAS Security Mode Command towards a UE if
one of the N2 procedures including a new key is ongoing with the UE.

3. When the AMF has sent a NAS Security Mode Command to a UE in order to
take a new KAMF into use and receives a request for an inter-AMF handover
or an inter-RAT handover from the serving gNB/ng-eNB, the AMF shall wait
for the completion of the NAS SMC procedure (i.e. receiving NAS Security
Mode Complete) before initiating an inter-AMF handover or initiating an
inter-RAT handover.

4. When the AMF has initiated a NGAP UE Context Modification procedure in
order to take a new KgNB into use, and receives a request for an inter-AMF
handover from the serving gNB/ng-eNB, and decides not to change the KAMF
for the inter-AMF handover, the AMF shall wait for the (successful or
unsuccessful) completion of the UE Context Modification procedure before
initiating an inter-AMF handover.

5. Once the source AMF has initiated inter-AMF handover to the target AMF,
or inter-system handover to the target MME, the source AMF shall not send
any downlink NAS messages to the UE until it is aware that the handover has
either failed or has been cancelled.




6.9.5.2  Rules related to parallel NAS connections

Concurrent runs of security procedures in parallel over two different NAS
connections when terminated in the same AMF can lead to race conditions and
mismatches between the security contexts in the network and the UE. In
order to avoid such mismatches, the following rules shall be followed:

1. The SEAF/AMF shall not initiate a primary authentication or NAS SMC
procedure in case a primary authentication or a NAS SMC procedure is
ongoing on a parallel NAS connection. Authentication procedures followed by
a NAS SMC procedures taking the new 5G security context into use, shall be
performed on one NAS signalling connection at a time.

2. When the AMF has sent a NAS Security Mode Command to a UE in order to
take a new KAMF into use and receives a context transfer request message
for the UE from another AMF, the AMF shall wait for the completion of the
NAS SMC procedure (e.g. receiving NAS Security Mode Complete) before
transferring the context.

3. The UE shall not initiate a NAS registration over a second NAS
connection to an AMF of the same network before primary authentication on
the first NAS connection is complete.


6.9.6  Security handling in registration with AMF reallocation via direct
         NAS reroute

In registration with AMF reallocation via direct NAS reroute, the initial
AMF shall send the complete Registration Request in clear text to the
target AMF.

NOTE:  The completeRegistration Request in clear text is obtained based on
the Registration Request initially received by the initial AMF if the UE
have a valid NAS sececurity context, or the Registration Request received
by the initial AMF as part of the Security Mode Complete if it is executed.

In registration with AMF reallocation via direct NAS reroute, the initial
AMF shall use its local policy to determine whether to perform horizontal
KAMF derivation on current KAMF. As described in Clause 6.9.3, if the
initial AMF decides not to change KAMF, the initial AMF shall send the
current security context to the target AMF; otherwise, the initial AMF
shall derive new security context and send to the target AMF the derived
security context and the indication of horizontal KAMF derivation (i.e.,
keyAmfHDerivationInd).

If the target AMF receives the indication of horizontal KAMF derivation
(i.e., keyAmfHDerivationInd) from the initial AMF, it shall initiate NAS
SMC.  If the target AMF does not receive keyAmfHDerivationInd, the target
AMF shall use the received security context from initial AMF and send
protected NAS message including protected authentication request message if
authentication is needed. The target AMF decides whether to perform
authentication based on local policy.


6.10 Dual connectivity


6.10.1 Introduction


6.10.1.1 General

This clause describes the security functions necessary to support a UE that
is simultaneously connected to more than one NG-RAN node, i.e., Multi-Radio
dual connectivity (MR-DC) with 5GC as described in TS 37.340 [51]. The
security functions are described in the context of the functions
controlling the dual connectivity.


6.10.1.2 Dual Connectivity protocol architecture for MR-DC with 5GC

The dual connectivity protocol architecture for MR-DC with 5GC is shown in
figure 6.10.1.2-1. The TS 37.340 [51] is to be referred for further details
of the architecture illustrating MCG, SCG, and Split bearers for both SRBs
and DRBs. The architecture has the following variants:

-  NG-RAN E-UTRA-NR Dual Connectivity (NGEN-DC) is the variant when the UE
is connected to one ng-eNB that acts as a Master Node (MN) and one gNB that
acts as a Secondary Node (SN). The ng-eNB is connected to the 5GC and the
gNB is connected to the ng-eNB via Xn interface.

-  NR-E-UTRA Dual Connectivity (NE-DC) is the variant when the UE is
connected to one gNB that acts as a MN and one ng-eNB that acts as a SN.
The MN (i.e., gNB) is connected to 5GC and the ng-eNB (i.e., SN) is
connected to the gNB via Xn interface.

-  NR-NR Dual Connectivity (NR-DC) is the variant when the UE is connected
to one gNB that acts as a MN and one gNB that acts as a SN. The MN is
connected to 5GC while the SN is connected to MN via Xn interface.




[pic]

Figure 6.10.1.2-1 Multi-Radio dual connectivity (MR-DC) protocol
architecture.

When the MN establishes security context between an SN and the UE for the
first time for a given AS security context shared between the MN and the
UE, the MN generates the KSN for the SN and sends it to the SN over the Xn-
C. To generate the KSN, the MN associates a counter, called an SN Counter,
with the current AS security context. The SN Counter is used as freshness
input into KSN derivations as described in the clause 6.10.3.2. The MN
sends the value of the SN Counter to the UE over the RRC signalling path
when it is required to generate a new KSN. The KSN is used to derive
further RRC and UP keys that are used between the UE and SN.


6.10.2 Security mechanisms and procedures for DC


6.10.2.1 SN Addition or modification

When the MN is executing the Secondary Node Addition procedure (i.e.
initial offload of one or more radio bearers to the SN), or the Secondary
Node Modification procedure (as in clauses 10.2.2 and 10.3.2 in TS 37.340
[51]) which requires an update of the KSN, the MN shall derive an KSN as
defined in clause 6.10.3.2 The MN shall maintain the SNCounter as defined
in Clause 6.10.3.1

When executing the procedure for adding subsequent radio bearer(s) to the
same SN, the MN shall, for each new radio bearer, assign a radio bearer
identity that has not previously been used since the last KSN change. If
the MN cannot allocate an unused radio bearer identity for a new radio
bearer in the SN, due to radio bearer identity space exhaustion, the MN
shall increment the SN Counter and compute a fresh KSN, and then shall
perform a SN Modification procedure to update the KSN.

The dual connectivity procedure with activation of encryption/decryption
and integrity protection follows the steps outlined on the Figure 6.10.2.1-
1.

[pic]

Figure 6.10.2.1-1. Security aspects in SN Addition/Modification procedures
(MN initiated)

1. The UE and the MN establish the RRC connection.

2. The MN sends SN Addition/Modification Request to the SN over the Xn-C to
negotiate the available resources, configuration, and algorithms at the SN.
The MN computes and delivers the KSN to the SN if a new key is needed. The
UE security capabilities (see subclause 6.10.4) and the UP security policy
received from the SMF shall also be sent to SN. In case of PDU split, UP
integrity protection and ciphering activation decision from MN may be also
included as described in subclause 6.10.4.

3. The SN allocates the necessary resources and chooses the ciphering
algorithm and integrity algorithm which has the highest priority from its
configured list and is also present in the UE security capability. If a new
KSN was delivered to the SN then the SN calculates the needed RRC. The UP
keys may be derived at the same time when RRC key derived. The SN shall
activate the UP security policy as described in subclause 6.10.4.

4. The SN sends SN Addition/Modification Acknowledge to the MN indicating
availability of requested resources and the identifiers for the selected
algorithm(s) for the requested DRBs and/or SRB for the UE. The UP integrity
protection and encryption indications shall be send to the MN.

5. The MN sends the RRC Connection Reconfiguration Request to the UE
instructing it to configure the new DRBs and/or SRB for the SN. The MN
shall include the SN Counter parameter to indicate a new KSN is needed and
the UE shall compute the KSN for the SN. The MN forwards the UE
configuration parameters (which contains the algorithm identifier(s)
received from the SN in step 4) , and UP integrity protection and
encryption indications(received from the SN in step 4) to the UE (see
subclause 6.10.3.3 for further details).

NOTE 3: Since the message is sent over the RRC connection between the MN
and the UE, it is integrity protected using the KRRCint of the MN. Hence
the SN Counter cannot be tampered with.

6. The UE accepts the RRC Connection Reconfiguration Request after
validating its integrity. The UE shall compute the KSN for the SN if an SN
Counter parameter was included. The UE shall also compute the needed RRC
and UP keys and activate the RRC and UP protection as per the indications
received for the associated SRB and/or DRBs respectively. The UE sends the
RRC Reconfiguration Complete to the MN. The UE activates the chosen
encryption/decryption and integrity protection keys with the SN at this
point.

7. MN sends SN Reconfiguration Complete to the SN over the Xn-C to inform
the SN of the configuration result. On receipt of this message, SN may
activate the chosen encryption/decryption and integrity protection with UE.
If SN does not activate encryption/decryption and integrity protection with
the UE at this stage, SN shall activate encryption/decryption and integrity
protection upon receiving the Random Access request from the UE.


6.10.2.2 Secondary Node key update


6.10.2.2.1  General

The SN shall request the Master Node to update the KSN over the Xn-C, when
uplink and/or downlink PDCP COUNTs are about to wrap around for any of the
SCG DRBs or SCG SRB.

If the Master Node re-keys its currently active AS key in an 5G AS security
context the Master Node shall update any KSN associated with that 5G AS
security context.

Whenever the UE or SN start using a fresh KSN, they shall re-calculate the
RRC and UP keys from the fresh KSN.


6.10.2.2.2  MN initiated

The Master Node may update the KSN for any reason. If the MN decides to
update the KSN, the MN shall perform a SN modification procedure to deliver
the fresh KSN to the SN as defined in clause 6.10.2.1. The MN shall provide
the value of the SN Counter used in the derivation of the KSN to the UE in
an integrity protected RRC Connection Reconfiguration procedure. The UE
shall derive the KSN as described in clause  A.16.


6.10.2.2.3  SN initiated

When uplink and/or downlink PDCP COUNTs are about to wrap around for any of
the SCG DRBs or SCG SRB, the SN shall request the MN to update the KSN over
the Xn-C using the SN Modification procedure with MN involvement. The SN
shall send the SN Modification Required message including KSN key update an
indication to the MN as shown in Figure 6.10.2.2.3-1. When the MN receives
KSN Key update indication, the MN shall derive a fresh KSN and send the
derived KSN to the SN in the SN Modification Request message as in clause
6.10.2.1. Rest of the flows are like the call flow in Clause6.10.2.1.

[pic]

Figure 6.10.2.2.3-1. SN Key update procedure using SN Modification
procedure (SN initiated with MN involvement)


6.10.2.3 SN release and change

When the SN releases the last UE radio bearer on the SN or when the SN is
changed, i.e., the UE radio bearer(s) is moved from the SN, the SN and the
UE shall delete the SN RRC and UP keys. The SN and UE shall also delete the
KSN, if it was not deleted earlier.


6.10.3 Establishing the security context between the UE and SN


6.10.3.1 SN Counter maintenance

The MN shall maintain a 16-bit counter, SN Counter, in its AS security
context. The SN Counter is used when computing the KSN.

The MN maintains the value of the counter SN Counter for a duration of the
current 5G AS security context between UE and MN. The UE does not need to
maintain the SN Counter after it has computed the KSN since the MN provides
the UE with the current SN Counter value when the UE needs to compute a new
KSN.

The SN Counter is a fresh input to KSN derivation. That is, the UE assumes
that the MN provides a fresh SN Counter each time and does not need to
verify the freshness of the SN Counter.

NOTE: An attacker cannot, over the air modify the SN Counter and force re-
use of the same SN Counter. The reason for this is that the SN Counter is
delivered over the RRC connection between the MN and the UE, and this
connection is both integrity protected and protected from replay.

The MN shall set the SN Counter to 0 when a new AS root key, KNG-RAN, in
the associated 5G AS security context is established. The MN shall set the
SN Counter to 1 after the first calculated KSN, and monotonically
increment it for each additional calculated KSN. The SN Counter value '0'
is used to calculate the first KSN.

If the MN decides to release the offloaded connections to the SN and later
decides to re-start the offloading to the same SN, the SN Counter value
shall keep increasing, thus keeping the computed KSN fresh.

The MN shall refresh the root key of the 5G AS security context associated
with the SN Counter before the SN Counter wraps around. Refreshing the root
key is done using intra cell handover as described in subclause 6.7.3.3 of
the present document. When the root key is refreshed, the SN Counter is
reset to '0' as defined above.


6.10.3.2 Derivation of keys

The UE and MN shall derive the security key KSN of the SN as defined in
Annex A.16 of the present document.

The SN RRC and UP keys shall be derived from the KSN both at the SN and the
UE using the function given in Annex A.7 of TS 33.401 [10] if the SN is a
ng-eNB or using the function given in Annex A.8 of the present
specification if the SN is a gNB.

Once all the SN RRC and UP keys have been derived from the KSN, the SN and
UE may delete the KSN.


6.10.3.3 Negotiation of security algorithms

The MN shall receive the UE security capabilities from the AMF or the
previous NG-RAN node. These security capabilities include both LTE and NR
security capabilities.

When establishing one or more DRBs and/or SRBs for a UE at the SN, as shown
on Figure 6.10.2.1-1, the MN shall provide the UE security capabilities of
the UE to the SN in the SN Addition/Modification Request message.

Upon receipt of this message, the SN shall select the algorithms with
highest priority in its locally configured list of algorithms that are also
present in the received UE security capabilities and include the selected
algorithms in SN Addition/Modification Request Acknowledge.

The MN shall provide the selected algorithms to the UE during the
RRCConnectionReconfiguration procedure that configures the DRBs and/or SRB
with the SN for the UE. The UE shall use the indicated algorithms for the
DRBs and/or SRB whose PDCP terminates on the SN.

NOTE: The algorithms that the UE uses with the MN can be the same or
different to the algorithms used with the SN.


6.10.4 Protection of traffic between UE and SN

This subclause provides the details of the needed SN RRC and UP keys and
the algorithms used to protect the traffic whose PDCP terminates on the SN.
The UE and SN may either calculate all the SN RRC and UP keys at once or as
there are required to be used. The RRC and UP keys are KRRCenc and KRRCint
for the SRB whose PDCP terminates on the SN and KUPenc for the DRBs whose
PDCP terminate on the SN.

When the SN is a gNB, the RRC traffic protection directly between the UE
and SN is done using the mechanism described in subclause 6.5 of the
present document with the algorithms specified in Annex D of the present
document.

When the SN is a gNB, the UP traffic protection and activation is done
using the mechanism described in subclauses 6.6 of the present document
using the algorithms specified in Annex D of the present document. The UP
security activation procedure for MR-DC (meaning NR-DC, NE-DC and NGEN-DC)
scenarios use the mechanism described in sublcause 6.10.2.1 with the
following additional procedures:
In the case of split PDU session where some of the DRB(s) is terminated at
the MN and some DRB(s) is terminated at the SN, the MN shall ensure that
all DRBs which belong to the same PDU session have the same UP integrity
protection and ciphering activation. To achieve this, the MN shall inform
the SN with its UP integrity protection and ciphering activation decision
of any DRB that is offloaded and to be terminated at the SN. The SN shall
activate the UP integrity protection and ciphering based on the MN
decision.

For UP Integrity Protection, if the UE does not indicate that it supports
the use of integrity protection with ng-eNB:
Case 1: UP security policy indicates UP Integrity Protection "required":

In NGEN-DC scenario, the MN shall reject the PDU session.

In NE-DC scenario, if the MN decides to activate the UP integrity
protection for this PDU session, the MN shall not offload any DRB of the
PDU session to the SN.

In NR-DC scenario, the MN makes the decision for PDU sessions that are
terminated at the MN while the SN makes the decision for PDU sessions that
are terminated at the SN.

Case 2: UP security policy indicates UP Integrity Protection "preferred":

In NGEN-DC scenario, the MN shall always deactivate UP integrity
protection. In this case, the SN shall always deactivate the UP integrity
protection of any PDU session terminated at the SN.

In NE-DC scenario, if the MN has activated any of this PDU session DRBs
with UP integrity protection "on", the MN shall not offload any DRB of this
PDU session to the SN. However, if the MN has activated all DRBs of this
PDU session with integrity protection "off", the MN may offload DRBs of
this PDU session to the SN. In this case, the SN shall not activate the UP
integrity protection and shall always set the UP integrity protection
indication to "off".

In NR-DC scenario, the MN makes the decision for PDU sessions that are
terminated at the MN while the SN makes the decision for PDU sessions that
are terminated at the SN.

Case 3: UP security policy indicates UP Integrity Protection "not needed":

In all MR-DC scenarios, the MN and SN shall always deactivate UP integrity
protection.

For UP integrity protection, if the UE indicates that it supports use of
integrity protection with ng-eNB, in all 5GC-based MR-DC scenarios, the MN
and SN shall make a decision on UP integrity protection according to the UP
security policy for PDU sessions which terminate at the MN and SN,
respectively, where all DRBs belonging to the same PDU session shall have
the integrity protection either "on" or "off".

For UP Ciphering Protection:

In all MR-DC scenario, the MN and SN shall make a decision on UP ciphering
protection according to the UP security policy for PDU sessions which
terminate at the MN and SN, respectively, where all DRBs belonging to the
same PDU session shall have the ciphering protection either "on" or "off".

  NOTE 1:  A UE that is Rel-16 or prior does not support UP integrity
    protection with ng-eNB. Therefore, explicit indication, as specified in
    clause 6.6.4.3, that the UE supports use of UP integrity protection
    with ng-eNB is required.

In all scenarios of MR-DC, the SN shall send the UP integrity protection
and encryption indications to the MN in the SN Addition/Modification
Request Acknowledgement message. The MN shall forward the UP integrity
protection and encryption indications to the UE in RRC Connection
Reconfiguration message. The UE activate the UP security protection with
the SN based on the UP integrity protection and encryption indications
using the scheme described in subclause 6.6.2. If the MN has not activated
the RRC security before sending the RRC Connection Reconfiguration message,
the MN shall perform AS SMC procedure first.

When the SN is a ng-eNB, the RRC and UP traffic is protected using the
mechanism described in subclauses 7.4 and 7.3 respectively of TS 33.401
[10] with the algorithms specified in Annex C of TS 33.401 [10].
Additionally, the UP traffic is integrity protected based on the UP
security policy and the indication that the UE supports the use of UP
integrity protection with ng-eNB.

NOTE:  Void.


6.10.5 Handover Procedure

During N2 and Xn handover, the DRB and/or SRB connections between the UE
and the SN shall be released, and the SN and the UE shall delete the SN RRC
and UP keys since they shall be refreshed by the new KSN derived by the
target-MN.


6.10.6 Signalling procedure for PDCP COUNT check

SN may request the MN to execute a counter check procedure specified in
Clause 6.13 of this specification to verify the value of the PDCP COUNT(s)
associated with DRB(s) offloaded to the SN. To accomplish this, the SN
shall communicate this request, including the expected values of PDCP
COUNT(s) and associated radio bearer identities to the MN over the Xn-C.

If the MN receives a RRC counter check response from the UE that contains
one or several PDCP COUNT values (possibly associated with both MN and SN),
the MN may release the connection or report the difference of the PDCP
COUNT values to the serving AMF or O&M server for further traffic analysis,
e.g., detecting the attacker.


6.10.7 Radio link failure recovery

Since the MN holds the control plane functions in MR-DC as in clause
6.10.1.2, the UE runs the RRC re-establishment procedure with the MN as
specified in Clause 6.11 of the present document. During the RRC re-
establishment procedure, the radio bearers between the UE and the SN shall
be released.




6.11 Security handling for RRC connection re-establishment procedure

NOTE:  This clause applies only to the gNB. Inter-RAT RRC Connection Re-
establishment (i.e., between gNB and ng-eNB) is not supported. The RRC
Connection Re-establishment procedure for the ng-eNB is specified in TS
33.401 [10].

The KNG-RAN* and token calculation at handover preparation are cell
specific instead of gNB specific. During the handover procedure, at
potential RRC connection reestablishment (e.g., in handover failure case),
the UE may select a cell different from the target cell to initiate the
reestablishment procedure. To ensure that the UE RRC connection re-
establishment attempt is successful when the UE selects another cell under
the control of the target gNB at handover preparation, the source gNB may
prepare multiple KNG-RAN* keys and tokens for multiple cells which are
under the control of the target gNB. The source gNB may prepare for
multiple cells belonging to the serving gNB itself.

The preparation of these cells includes sending security context containing
KNG-RAN* keys and tokens for each cell to be prepared, as well as the
corresponding NCC, the UE 5G security capabilities, and the security
algorithms used in the source cell for computing the token, to the target
gNB. The source gNB shall derive the KNG-RAN* keys as described in Annex
A.11/A.12 based on the corresponding target cells physical cell ID and
frequency ARFCN-DL.

In order to calculate the token, the source gNB shall use the negotiated
NIA-algorithm from the 5G AS Security context from the source gNB with the
following inputs: source C-RNTI, source PCI and target Cell-ID, where
source PCI and source C-RNTI are associated with the cell the UE last had
an active RRC connection with and target Cell-ID is the identity of the
target cell where the RRCReestablishmentRequest is sent to.

-  KEY shall be set to KRRCint of the source cell;

-  all BEARER bits shall be set to 1;

-  DIRECTION bit shall be set to 1;

-  all COUNT bits shall be set to 1.

The token shall be the 16 least significant bits of the output of the used
integrity algorithm.

In order to avoid UEs inability to perform the RRC re-establishment
procedure due to a failure during a handover or a connection re-
establishment, the UE shall keep the KgNB used in the source cell until the
handover or a connection re-establishment has been completed successfully
or until the UE has deleted the KgNB for other reasons (e.g., due to
transitioning to CM-IDLE).

For Xn handover, the target gNB shall use the received multiple KNG-RAN*
keys. But for N2 handover, the target gNB discards the multiple KNG-RAN*
keys received from the source gNB, and derives the KNG-RAN* keys as
described in Annex A.11/A.12 based on the received fresh {NH, NCC} pair
from AMF for forward security purpose.

When an RRCReestablishmentRequest is initiated by the UE, the
RRCReestablishmentRequest shall contain the token corresponding to the cell
the UE tries to reconnect to. This message is transmitted over SRB0 and
hence not integrity protected.

If the target gNB receiving the RRCReestablishmentRequest has a prepared
KNG-RAN* key and token for the specific cell, the target gNB receiving the
RRCReestablishmentRequest shall validate the token received in the
RRCReestablishmentRequest. However, if the target gNB has not prepared
token for the cell, the target gNB extracts the C-RNTI and PCI from the
RRCReestablishmentRequest message. The target gNB contacts the source gNB
based on PCI by sending an Xn-AP Retrieve UE Context Request message with
the following included: C-RNTI, PCI, the token and target Cell-ID, in order
to allow the source gNB to validate the UE request and to retrieve the UE
context including the UE 5G AS security context.

The source gNB retrieves the stored UE context including the UE 5G AS
security context from its database using the C-RNTI. The source gNB
verifies the token. If the verification is successful, then the source gNB
calculates KNG-RAN* using the target cell PCI, target ARFCN-DL and the
KgNB/NH in the current UE 5G AS security context based on either a
horizontal key derivation or a vertical key derivation according to whether
the source gNB has an unused pair of {NCC, NH} as described in Annex A.11.
The source gNB can obtain the target PCI and target ARFCN-DL from a cell
configuration database by means of the target Cell-ID which was received
from the target gNB. Then the source gNB shall respond with an Xn-AP
Retrieve UE Context Response message to the target gNB including the UE
context that contains the UE 5G AS security context.

After successful verification of token by either target gNB or source gNB,
the target gNB shall check whether it supports ciphering and integrity
algorithms that the UE was using with the last source cell, if supports
and these algorithms are the chosen algorithms or they are not the chosen
algorithms by the target gNB, the target gNB shall use the KNG-RAN*
corresponding to the selected cell as KgNB and derive new RRC keys (new
KRRCint and new KRRCenc) based on the KgNB and the AS algorithms used in
source cell.

Then, the target gNB shall respond with an RRCReestablishment message
containing the NCC received during the preparation phase or context fetch
phase. This RRCReestablishment message is sent on SRB1 and is integrity
protected in PDCP layer using the newly calculated KRRCint.

If verification of the token is failed by either target gNB or source gNB,
or the target gNB does not support the ciphering and integrity algorithms
used in source cell, the target gNB shall reply with an RRCSetup message.
The RRCSetup message is sent on SRB0 and hence not integrity protected.

Next the target gNB and UE shall do the following: The UE shall firstly
synchronize the locally kept NH parameter as defined in Annex A.10 if the
received NCC value is different from the current NCC value in the UE
itself. Then the UE shall derive KNG-RAN* as described in Annex A.11/A.12
based on the selected cells physical cell ID and its frequency ARFCN-DL.
The UE shall use this KNG-RAN* as KgNB. The gNB uses the KNG-RAN*
corresponding to the selected cell as KgNB. The UE shall derive the new RRC
keys from the KgNB and the AS algorithms (ciphering and integrity
algorithms) the UE was using with the source cell. The UE shall verify the
integrity of the RRCReestablishment message by verifying the PDCP MAC-I
using the newly derived KRRCint.

NOTE: Void.

If the UE successfully validate the integrity of the received
RRCReestablishment message, the UE shall respond with an
RRCReestablishmentComplete on SRB1 while being integrity protected and
ciphered using the new RRC keys. The RRCConnectionReconfiguration procedure
used to re-establish the remaining radio bearers shall only include
integrity protected and ciphered messages.

When the UE receives RRCSetup message, the UE shall perform the RRC
connection establishment procedure as if the UE was in RRC_IDLE.


6.12 Subscription identifier privacy


6.12.1 Subscription permanent identifier

In the 5G system, the globally unique 5G subscription permanent identifier
is called SUPI as defined in 3GPP TS 23.501 [2]. The SUCI is a privacy
preserving identifier containing the concealed SUPI.

The SUPI is privacy protected over-the-air by using the SUCI which is
described in clause 6.12.2. Handling of SUPI and privacy provisioning
related to concealing the SUPI shall be done according to the requirements
specified in clause 5 and details provided in clause 6.12.2.


6.12.2 Subscription concealed identifier

The SUbscription Concealed Identifier, called SUCI, is a privacy preserving
identifier containing the concealed SUPI.

The UE shall generate a SUCI using a protection scheme with the raw public
key, i.e. the Home Network Public Key, that was securely provisioned in
control of the home network. The protection schemes shall be the ones
specified in Annex C of this document or the ones specified by the HPLMN.

The UE shall construct a scheme-input from the subscription identifier part
of the SUPI as  follows:

  - For SUPIs containing IMSI, the subscription identifier part of the SUPI
    includes the MSIN of the IMSI as defined in TS 23.003 [19].

  - For SUPIs taking the form of a NAI, the subscription identifier part of
    the SUPI includes the "username" portion of the NAI as defined in NAI
    RFC 7542 [57].

The UE shall execute the protection scheme with the constructed scheme-
input as input and take the output as the Scheme Output.

The UE shall not conceal the Home Network Identifier and the Routing
Indicator.

For SUPIs containing IMSI, the UE shall construct the SUCI with the
following data fields:

-  The SUPI Type as defined in TS 23.003 [19] identifies the type of the
SUPI concealed in the SUCI.

-  The Home Network Identifier is set to the MCC and MNC of the IMSI as
specified in 23.003 [19].

-  The Routing Indicator as specified in TS 23.003 [19].

-  The Protection Scheme Identifier as specified in Annex C of this
specification.

-  The Home Network Public Key Identifier as specified in this document and
detailed in TS 23.003 [19].

-  The Scheme Output as specified in this document and detailed in TS
23.003 [19].

For SUPIs containing Network Specific Identifier, the UE shall construct
the SUCI in NAI format with the following data fields:

-  realm part of the SUCI is set to the realm part of the SUPI.

-  username part of the SUCI is formatted as specified in TS 23.003 [19]
using the SUPI Type, Routing Indicator, the Protection Scheme Identifier,
the Home Network Public Key Identifier and the Scheme Output.

NOTE 1:  The format of the SUPI protection scheme identifiers is defined in
Annex C.

NOTE 2:  The identifier and the format of the Scheme Output are defined by
the protection schemes in Annex C. In case of non-null-schemes, the
freshness and randomness of the SUCI will be taken care of by the
corresponding SUPI protection schemes.

NOTE 2a: In case of null-scheme being used, the Home Network Public Key
Identifier is set to a default value as described in TS 23.003 [19].

The UE shall include a SUCI only in the following 5G NAS messages:

-  if the UE is sending a Registration Request message of type "initial
registration" to a PLMN for which the UE does not already have a 5G-GUTI,
the UE shall include a SUCI to the Registration Request message, or

-  if the UE responds to an Identity Request message by which the network
requests the UE to provide its permanent identifier,  the UE  includes a
SUCI in the Identity Response message as specified in clause 6.12.4.

-  if the UE is sending a De-Registration Request message to a PLMN during
an initial registration procedure for which the UE did not receive the
registration accept message with 5G-GUTI, the UE shall include the SUCI
used in the initial registration to the De-Registration Request message.

NOTE 3:  In response to the Identity Request message, the UE never sends
the SUPI.

The UE shall generate a SUCI using "null-scheme" only in the following
cases:

-  if the UE is making an unauthenticated emergency session and it does not
have a 5G-GUTI to the chosen PLMN, or

-  if the home network has configured "null-scheme" to be used, or

-  if the home network has not provisioned the public key needed to
generate a SUCI.

If the operator's decision, indicated by the USIM, is that the USIM shall
calculate the SUCI, then the USIM shall not give the ME any parameter for
the calculation of the SUCI including the Home Network Public Key
Identifier, the Home Network Public Key, and the Protection Scheme
Identifier. If the ME determines that the calculation of the SUCI,
indicated by the USIM, shall be performed by the USIM, the ME shall delete
any previously received or locally cached parameters for the calculation of
the SUCI including the SUPI Type, the Routing Indicator, the Home Network
Public Key Identifier, the Home Network Public Key and the Protection
Scheme Identifier. The operator should use proprietary identifier for
protection schemes if the operator chooses that the calculation of the SUCI
shall be done in USIM.

If the operator's decision is that ME shall calculate the SUCI, the home
network operator shall provision in the USIM an ordered priority list of
the protection scheme identifiers that the operator allows. The priority
list of protection scheme identifiers in the USIM shall only contain
protection scheme identifiers specified in Annex C, and the list may
contain one or more protection schemes identifiers. The ME shall read the
SUCI calculation information from the USIM, including the SUPI, the SUPI
Type, the Routing Indicator, the Home Network Public Key Identifier, the
Home Network Public Key and the list of protection scheme identifiers. The
ME shall select the protection scheme from its supported schemes that has
the highest priority in the list are obtained from the USIM.

The ME shall calculate the SUCI using the null-scheme if the Home Network
Public Key or the priority list are not provisioned in the USIM.

NOTE 4:  The above feature is introduced since additional protection
schemes could be specified in the future for a release newer than the ME
release. In this case, the protection scheme selected by older MEs may not
be theprotection scheme with the highest priority in the list of the USIM.


6.12.3 Subscription temporary identifier

A new 5G-GUTI shall be sent to a UE only after a successful activation of
NAS security. The 5G-GUTI is defined in TS 23.003 [19].

Upon receiving Registration Request message of type "initial registration"
or "mobility registration update" from a UE, the AMF shall send a new 5G-
GUTI to the UE in the registration procedure.

Upon receiving Registration Request message of type "periodic registration
update" from a UE, the AMF should send a new 5G-GUTI to the UE in the
registration procedure.

Upon receiving Service Request message sent by the UE in response to a
Paging message, the AMF shall send a new 5G-GUTI to the UE. This new 5G-
GUTI shall be sent before the current NAS signalling connection is released
or the N1 NAS signalling connection is suspended.

Upon receiving an indication from the lower layers that the RRC connection
has been resumed for a UE in 5GMM-IDLE mode with suspend indication in
response to a Paging message, the AMF shall send a new 5G-GUTI to the UE.
This new 5G-GUTI shall be sent before the current NAS signalling connection
is released or the suspension of the N1 NAS signalling connection.

NOTE 1:  It is left to implementation to re-assign 5G-GUTI more frequently
than in cases mentioned above, for example after a Service Request message
from the UE not triggered by the network.

NOTE 2:  It is left to implementation to generate 5G-GUTI containing 5G-
TMSI that uniquely identifies the UE within the AMF.

5G-TMSI generation should be following the best practices of unpredictable
identifier generation.

A new I-RNTI shall be sent to a UE only after a successful activation of AS
security.

On transition of UE to RRC INACTIVE state requested by gNB during RRC
Resume procedure or RNAU procedure, the gNB shall assign a new I-RNTI to
the UE.


6.12.4 Subscription identification procedure

The subscriber identification mechanism may be invoked by the serving
network when the UE cannot be identified by means of a temporary identity
(5G-GUTI). In particular, it should be used when the serving network cannot
retrieve the SUPI based on the 5G-GUTI by which the subscriber identifies
itself on the radio path.

The mechanism described in figure 6.12.4-1 allows the identification of a
UE on the radio path by means of the SUCI.

[pic]

Figure 6.12.4-1: Subscription identifier query

The mechanism is initiated by the AMF that requests the UE to send its
SUCI.

The UE shall calculate a fresh SUCI from SUPI using the Home Network Public
Key, and respond with Identity Response carrying the SUCI. The UE shall
implement a mechanism to limit the frequency at which the UE responds with
a fresh SUCI to an Identity Request for a given 5G-GUTI.

NOTE 1:  If the UE is using any other scheme than the null-scheme, the SUCI
does not reveal the SUPI.

AMF may initiate authentication with AUSF to receive SUPI as specified in
clause 6.1.3.

In case the UE registers for Emergency Services and receives an Identity
Request, the UE shall use the null-scheme for generating the SUCI in the
Identity Response.

NOTE 2:  Registration for Emergency does not provide subscription
identifier confidentiality.


6.12.5 Subscription identifier de-concealing function (SIDF)

SIDF is responsible for de-concealing the SUPI from the SUCI. When the Home
Network Public Key is used for encryption of SUPI, the SIDF shall use the
Home Network Private Key that is securely stored in the home operator's
network to decrypt the SUCI. The de-concealment shall take place at the
UDM. Access rights to the SIDF shall be defined, such that only a network
element of the home network is allowed to request SIDF.

NOTE:  One UDM can comprise several UDM instances. The Routing Indicator in
the SUCI can be used to identify the right UDM instance that is capable of
serving a subscriber.


6.13 Signalling procedure for PDCP COUNT check

The following procedure is used optionally by the gNB to periodically
perform a local authentication. At the same time, the amount of data sent
during the AS connection is periodically checked by the gNB and the UE for
both up and down streams. If UE receives the Counter Check request, it
shall respond with Counter Check Response message.

NOTE:  The PDCP COUNT check is used to detect maliciously inserted packets.
Packet insertion is detected automatically in integrity protected DRBs;
therefore, the PDCP COUNT check procedure is superfluous for integrity
protected bearers.

The gNB is monitoring the PDCP COUNT values associated to each radio
bearer. The procedure is triggered whenever any of these values reaches a
critical checking value. The granularity of these checking values and the
values themselves are defined by the visited network. All messages in the
procedure are integrity protected.

 [pic]

Figure 6.13-1: gNB periodic local authentication procedure

1. When a checking value is reached (e.g. the value in some fixed bit
position in the hyperframe number is changed), a Counter Check message is
sent by the gNB. The Counter Check message contains the most significant
parts of the PDCP COUNT values (which reflect amount of data sent and
received) from each active radio bearer.

2. The UE compares the PDCP COUNT values received in the Counter Check
message with the values of its radio bearers. Different UE PDCP COUNT
values are included within the Counter Check Response message.

3. If the gNB receives a counter check response message that does not
contain any PDCP COUNT values, the procedure ends. If the gNB receives a
counter check response that contains one or several PDCP COUNT values, the
gNB may release the connection or report the difference of the PDCP COUNT
values for the serving AMF or O&M server for further traffic analysis for
e.g. detecting the attacker.


6.14 Steering of roaming security mechanism


6.14.1 General

This clause describes the security functions necessary to support steering
of the UE in the VPLMN during registration procedure and also after
registration as described in TS 23.122 [53] Annex C. The security functions
are described in the context of the functions supporting the control plane
solution for steering of roaming in 5GS.

If the control plane solution for Steering of Roaming is supported by the
HPLMN, the AUSF shall store the latest KAUSF after the completion of the
latest primary authentication.

The content of the Steering List as well as the conditions for sending it
to the UE are described in TS 23.122 [53] Annex C. The Steering List
includes either a list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations, a
secured packet or the HPLMN indication that 'no change of the "Operator
Controlled PLMN Selector with Access Technology" list stored in the UE is
needed and thus no list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations is
provided'.

NOTE:  The Steering of Roaming Information is defined in clause 1.2 of TS
23.122 [53]. It contains thus the ACK indication, the Steering List and the
integrity protection information.


6.14.2 Security mechanisms


6.14.2.1 Procedure for steering of UE in VPLMN during registration

The security procedure for the case where the UE registers with VPLMN AMF
is described below in figure6.14.2.1-1:

[pic]

Figure6.14.2.1-1: Procedure for providing list of preferred PLMN/access
technology combinations during registration in VPLMN

1) The UE initiates registration by sending Registration Request message to
the VPLMN AMF.

2-3) The VPLMN AMF executes the registration procedure as defined in sub-
clause4.2.2.2.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[8]. As part of the registration
procedure, the VPLMN AMF executes primary authentication of the UE and then
initiates the NAS SMC procedure, after the authentication is successful.

4-5) The VPLMN AMF invokes the Nudm_UECM_Registration message to the UDM
and registers access with the UDM as per step 14a in sub-clause 4.2.2.2.2
of 3GPP TS 23.502[8].

6) The VPLMN AMF invokes Nudm_SDM_Get service operation message to the UDM
to get amongst other information the Access and Mobility Subscription data
for the UE (see step14b in sub-clause4.2.2.2.2 of 3GPPTS23.502[8]).

7) The UDM decides to send the Steering of Roaming Information, and obtains
a list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations and optional
additional SoR information (e.g. SOR-CMCI and the "Store the SOR-CMCI in
the ME" indicator), or a secured packet list as described in TS 23.122
[53].

NOTE 1: Additional SoR information (e.g. SOR-CMCI and the "Store the SOR-
CMCI in the ME" indicator) can only be added when the AMF supports SoR
transparent container.

   If the UDM determines that the UE is configured to not expect to receive
Steering of Roaming Information at initial registration and if the UDM
determines that no change of the "Operator Controlled PLMN Selector with
Access Technology" list stored in the UE is needed, then the UDM may not
piggyback Steering of Roaming Information at all in the Nudm_SDM_Get
response and hence the following steps are omitted.

8-9) The UDM shall invoke Nausf_SoRProtection service operation message to
the AUSF to get SoR-MAC-IAUSF and CounterSoR as specified in sub-clause
14.1.3 of this document. The UDM shall select the AUSF that holds the
latest KAUSF of the UE.

If the HPLMN decides that the UE is to acknowledge the successful security
check of the received Steering of Roaming  Information, then the UDM shall
set accordingly the ACK Indication included in the Nausf_SoRProtection
service operation message to signal that it also needs the expected SoR-
XMAC-IUE, as specified in sub-clause 14.1.3 of this document.

NOTE 2:  At reception of Nausf_SoRProtection_Protect request from the UDM,
if the SoR header is not included in the request, the AUSF constructs the
SOR header, as described in clause 9.11.3.51 of TS 24.501 [35], based on
the information received from the UDM, i.e. ACK Indication and list of
preferred PLMN/access technology combinations or secured packet (if
provided); otherwise, if the SoR header is contained in the request, the
AUSF uses the received SoR header in the calculation of SoR-MAC-IAUSF..

The details of the CounterSoR are specified in sub-clause 6.14.2.3 of this
document.  The inclusion of the Steering List  and the SoR header in the
calculation of SoR-MAC-IAUSF allows the UE to verify that the received
Steering of Roaming Information is not tampered with or removed by the
VPLMN. The expected SoR-XMAC-IUE allows the UDM to verify that the UE
received the Steering of Roaming Information.

10)  The UDM responds to the Nudm_SDM_Get service operation to the VPLMN
AMF, which shall include the SoR transparent container as specified in
clause 6.1.6.3.2 of TS 29.503 [93] if the VPLMN AMF support SoR transparent
container, or shall include individual IEs comprising the ACK Indication,
the list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations or secured packet
(if provided), SoR-MAC-IAUSF and CounterSoR within the Access and Mobility
Subscription data. If the UDM requests an acknowledgement, it shall
temporarily store the expected SoR-XMAC-IUE.

11)  If the SoR transparent container is received from the UDM, the VPLMN
AMF shall include the received SoR transparent container in the
Registration Accept message and send it to the UE. If the individual IEs
are received from the UDM, the VPLMN AMF shall construct the SOR header
based on the ACK Indication and the list of preferred PLMN/access
technology combinations or  secured packet (if provided) received from the
UDM and include it in the SOR transparent container as specified in clause
9.11.3.51 of TS 24.501 [35]. The vPLMN shall also include SoR-MAC-IAUSFand
CounterSoR(both also received from the UDM) in the constructed SoR
transparent container, and convey the constructed SoR transparent container
 to the UE in the Registration Accept message.

12)   On receiving the Registration Accept message with the SoR transparent
container from the AMF the UE shall calculate the SoR-MAC-IAUSF in the same
way as the AUSF (as specified in Annex A.17) on the SoR transparent
container, including the CounterSoR and the SoR header, and verifies
whether it matches the SoR-MAC-IAUSF value received in the Registration
Accept message. Based on the SoR-MAC-IAUSF verification outcome, the
behaviour of the UE is specified in TS 23.122 [53].

13) If the UDM has requested an acknowledgement from the UE and the UE
verified that the SoR transparent container received in step12 has been
provided by the HPLMN, then the UE shall send the Registration Complete
message to the serving AMF. The UE shall generate the SoR-MAC-IUE as
specified in Annex A.18 and includes the generated SoR-MAC-IUE in a SOR
transparent container in the Registration Complete message.

14)  The AMF sends a Nudm_SDM_Info request message to the UDM. If a
transparent container with the SoR-MAC-IUE was received in the Registration
Complete message, then if the AMF supports SoR transparent container, the
AMF shall include the received SoR transparent container in SoR transparent
container in the Nudm_SDM_Info request message, otherwise, the AMF shall
include the SoR-MAC-IUE  in the received SoR transparent container in the
Nudm_SDM_Info request message.

15)  If the HPLMN indicated that the UE is to acknowledge the successful
security check of the received Steering of Roaming  Information in step 10,
then the UDM shall compare the received SoR-MAC-IUE with the expected SoR-
XMAC-IUE that the UDM stored temporarily in step 10.




6.14.2.2 Procedure for steering of UE in VPLMN or HPLMN after registration

The security procedure for the steering of UE in VPLMN after registration
is described below in figure6.14.2.2-1:





[pic]

Figure6.14.2.2-1: Procedure for providing list of preferred PLMN/access
technology combinations after registration

1) The UDM decides to notify the UE of the changes to the Steering of
Roaming Information by the means of invoking Nudm_SDM_Notification service
operation.


2-3) The UDM shall invoke Nausf_SoRProtection service operation message by
including the ACK Indication and optionally the list of preferred
PLMN/access technology combinations or secured packet or SoR transparent
container (only if transparent container is supported by the AMF) to the
AUSF to get SoR-MAC-IAUSF and CounterSoR as specified in sub-clause 14.1.3
of this document. The UDM shall select the AUSF that holds the latest KAUSF
of the UE.

If the HPLMN decided that the UE is to acknowledge the successful security
check of the received Steering of Roaming Information, then the UDM shall
set accordingly the ACK Indication included in the Nausf_SoRProtection
service operation message to signal that it also needs the expected SoR-
XMAC-IUE, as specified in sub-clause 14.1.3 of this document.

NOTE:  At reception of Nausf_SoRProtection_Protect request from the UDM, if
the SoR header is not included in the request, the AUSF constructs the SOR
header, as described in clause 9.11.3.51 of TS 24.501 [35], based on the
information received from the UDM, i.e. ACK Indication and optionally the
list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations or  secured packet;
otherwise, if the SoR header in contained in the request, the AUSF uses the
received SoR header in the calculation of SoR-MAC-IAUSF..

The details of the CounterSoR are specified in sub-clause 6.14.2.3 of this
document. The inclusion of the Steering List and the SOR header in the
calculation of SoR-MAC-IAUSF allows the UE to verify that the Steering of
Roaming Information received is not tampered with or removed by the VPLMN.
The inclusion of these information in the calculation of the expected SoR-
XMAC-IUE allows the UDM to verify that the UE received the Steering of
Roaming Information.

4) The UDM shall invoke Nudm_SDM_Notification service operation, which
contains the SoR transaprent container as specified in clause 6.1.6.3.2 of
TS 29.503 [93] if the VPMN AMF support SOR transparent container, or
contains individual IEs including an optional the list of preferred
PLMN/access technology combinations or secured packet, the ACK Indication,
SoR-MAC-IAUSF, and CounterSoR within the Access and Mobility Subscription
data. If the UDM requests an acknowledgement, it shall temporarily store
the expected SoR-XMAC-IUE.

5) Upon receiving the Nudm_SDM_Notification message, if the SoR transparent
container is included in the message, the AMF shall send a DL NAS Transport
message to the served UE. including the received SoR transparent container;
otherwise, the AMF shall construct the SOR transparent container (including
the SOR header) as specified in clause 9.11.3.51 of 3GPP TS 24.501 [35]
based on the ACK Indication, the Steering List, SoR-MAC-IAUSF and
CounterSoR received from the UDM, and send the constructed SoR transparent
container included to the served UE in a DL NAS Transport message.

6)  On receiving the DL NAS Transport message, the UE shall calculate the
SoR-MAC-IAUSF in the same way as the AUSF (as specified in Annex A.17) on
the received SoR transparent container, including the CounterSoR and the
SoR header and verify whether it matches the SoR-MAC-IAUSF value received
in the DL NAS Transport message.

7)   If the UDM has requested an acknowledgement from the UE and the UE
verified that the Steering Information  has been provided by the HPLMN,
then the UE shall send the UL NAS Transport message to the serving AMF. The
UE shall generate the SoR-MAC-IUE as specified in Annex A.18 and includes
the generated SoR-MAC-IUE in a SOR transparent container in the UL NAS
Transport message.

8) The AMF shall send a Nudm_SDM_Info request message to the UDM. If a SOR
transparent container with the SoR-MAC-IUE was received in the UL NAS
Transport message, the AMF shall include the received SoR transparent
container in the Nudm_SDM_Info request message if the AMF supports SoR
transparent container, otherwise, the AMF shall include the SoR-MAC-IUE in
the Nudm_SDM_Info request message.

9) If the HPLMN indicated that the UE is to acknowledge the successful
security check of the received Steering of Roaming  Information, then the
UDM shall compare the received SoR-MAC-IUE with the expected SoR-XMAC-IUE
that the UDM stored temporarily in step 4.


6.14.2.3 SoR Counter

The AUSF and the UE shall associate a 16-bit counter, CounterSoR, with the
key KAUSF.

The UE shall initialize the CounterSoR to 0x00 0x00 when the newly derived
KAUSF is  stored (see clause 6.2.2.2). The UE shall store the SoR counter.
If the USIM supports both 5G parameters storage and 5G parameters extended
storage, then CounterSoR shall be stored in the USIM. Otherwise, CounterSoR
shall be stored in the non-volatile memory of the ME

To generate the SoR-MAC-IAUSF, the AUSF shall use the CounterSoR. The
CounterSoR shall be incremented by the AUSF for every new computation of
the SoR-MAC-IAUSF. The CounterSoR is used as freshness input into SoR-MAC-
IAUSF and SoR-MAC-IUE derivations as described in the Annex A.17 and Annex
A.18 respectively, to mitigate the replay attack. The AUSF shall send the
value of the CounterSoR (used to generate the SoR-MAC-IAUSF) along with the
SoR-MAC-IAUSF to the UE. The UE shall only accept CounterSoR value that is
greater than stored CounterSoR value. The UE shall store the received
CounterSoR, only if the verification of the received SoR-MAC-IAUSF is
successful. The UE shall use the stored CounterSoR received from the HPLMN,
when deriving the SoR-MAC-IUE for the SoR acknowledgement.

The AUSF and the UE shall maintain the CounterSoR for lifetime of the
KAUSF.

The AUSF that supports the control plane solution for steering of roaming
shall initialize the CounterSoR to 0x00 0x01 when the newly derived KAUSF
is stored (see clause 6.2.2.1). The AUSF shall set the CounterSoR to 0x00
0x02 after the first calculated SoR-MAC-IAUSF, and monotonically increment
it for each additional calculated SoR-MAC-IAUSF. The SoR Counter value of
0x00 0x00 shall not be used to calculate the SoR-MAC-IAUSF and SoR-MAC-IUE.


The AUSF shall suspend the SoR protection service for the UE, if the
CounterSoR associated with the KAUSF of the UE, is about to wrap around.
When a fresh KAUSF is generated for the UE, the CounterSoR at the AUSF is
reset to 0x00 0x01 as defined above and the AUSF shall resume the SoR
protection service for the UE.


6.15 UE parameters update via UDM control plane procedure security
         mechanism


6.15.1 General

This clause describes the security functions necessary to update the UE
parameters using the UDM control plane procedure specified in TS 23.502
[8]. The security functions are described in the context of the functions
supporting the delivery of UE Parameters Update Data from the UDM to the UE
after the UE has successfully registered to the 5G network.

If the control plane procedure for UE parameters update is supported by the
UDM, the AUSF shall store the latest KAUSF after the completion of the
latest primary authentication.

The content of UE Parameters Update Data and the conditions for sending it
to the UE as well as how it is handled at the UE are specified in TS 24.501
[35].

NOTE : The home network relies on the serving network to deliver the UE
parameters update.


6.15.2 Security mechanisms


6.15.2.1 Procedure for UE Parameters Update

The UDM may decide to perform UE parameters update anytime after the UE has
been successfully authenticated and registered to the 5G system. The
security procedure for the UE parameters update is described below in
figure6.15.2.1-1:

[pic]

Figure6.15.2.1-1: Procedure for UE Parameters Update

1) The UDM decides to perform the UE Parameters Update (UPU) using the
control plane procedure while the UE is registered to the 5G system. If the
final consumer of any of the UE parameters to be updated (e.g., the updated
Routing ID Data) is the USIM, the UDM shall protect these parameters using
a secured packet mechanism (see 3GPPTS31.115[65]) to update the
parameters stored on the USIM. The UDM shall then prepare the UE Parameters
Update Data (UPU Data) by including the parameters protected by the secured
packet, if any, as well as any UE parameters for which final consumer is
the ME (see TS 24.501 [35]).

2-3) The UDM shall invoke Nausf_UPUProtection service operation message by
including the UPU Data to the AUSF to get UPU-MAC-IAUSF and CounterUPU as
specified in sub-clause 14.1.4 of this document. The UDM shall select the
AUSF that holds the latest KAUSF of the UE.

       If the UDM decided that the UE is to acknowledge the successful
       security check of the received UE Parameters Update Data, then the
       UDM shall set the corresponding indication in the UE Parameters
       Update Data (see TS 24.501 [35]) and include the ACK Indication in
       the Nausf_UPUProtection service operation message to signal that it
       also needs the expected UPU-XMAC-IUE, as specified in sub-clause
       14.1.4 of this document.

       The details of the CounterUPU is specified in sub-clause 6.15.2.2 of
       this document. The inclusion of UE Parameters Update Data in the
       calculation of UPU-MAC-IAUSF allows the UE to verify that it has not
       been tampered by any intermediary. The expected UPU-XMAC-IUE allows
       the UDM to verify that the UE received the UE Parameters Update Data
       correctly.

4) The UDM shall invoke Nudm_SDM_Notification service operation, which
includes the UPU transparent container if the AMF supports UPU transparent
container, or includes individual IEs comprising the UE Parameters Update
Data, UPU-MAC-IAUSF, CounterUPU within the Access and Mobility Subscription
data. If the UDM requests an acknowledgement, it shall temporarily store
the expected UPU-XMAC-IUE.

5) Upon receiving the Nudm_SDM_Notification message, the AMF shall send a
DL NAS Transport message to the served UE. The AMF shall include in the DL
NAS Transport message the transparent container if received from the UDM in
step 4. Otherwise, if the UDM provided individual IEs in step 4, then the
AMF shall construct a UPU transparent container.

6)  On receiving the DL NAS Transport message, the UE shall calculate the
UPU-MAC-IAUSF in the same way as the AUSF (as specified in Annex A.19) on
the received UE Parameters Update Data and the CounterUPU and verify
whether it matches the UPU-MAC-IAUSF value received within the UPU
transparent container in the DL NAS Transport message. If the verification
of UPU-MAC-IAUSF is successful and the UPU Data contains any parameters
that is protected by secured packet (see 3GPPTS31.115[65]), the ME shall
forward the secured packet to the USIM using procedures in
3GPPTS31.111[66]. If the verification of UPU-MAC-IAUSF is successful and
the UPU Data contains any parameters that is not protected by secure
packet, the ME shall update its stored parameters with the received
parameters in UDM Updata Data.

7)   If the UDM has requested an acknowledgement from the UE and the UE has
successfully verified and updated the UE Parameters Update Data provided by
the UDM, then the UE shall send the UL NAS Transport message to the serving
AMF. The UE shall generate the UPU-MAC-IUE as specified in Annex A.20 and
include the generated UPU-MAC-IUE in a transparent container in the UL NAS
Transport message.

8) If a transparent container with the UPU-MAC-IUE was received in the UL
NAS Transport message, the AMF shall send a Nudm_SDM_Info request message
with the transparent container to the UDM.

9) If the UDM indicated that the UE is to acknowledge the successful
security check of the received UE Parameters Update Data, then the UDM
shall compare the received UPU-MAC-IUE with the expected UPU-XMAC-IUE that
the UDM stored temporarily in step 4.


6.15.2.2 UE Parameters Update Counter

The AUSF and the UE shall associate a 16-bit counter, CounterUPU, with the
key KAUSF.

The UE shall initialize the CounterUPU to 0x00 0x00 when the newly derived
KAUSF is stored (see clause 6.2.2.2). The UE shall store the UPU counter .
If the USIM supports both 5G parameters storage and 5G parameters extended
storage, then CounterUPU shall be stored in the USIM. Otherwise, CounterUPU
shall be stored in the non-volatile memory of the ME.

To generate the UPU-MAC-IAUSF, the AUSF shall use the CounterUPU. The
CounterUPU shall be incremented by the AUSF for every new computation of
the UPU-MAC-IAUSF. The CounterUPU is used as freshness input into UPU-MAC-
IAUSF and UPU-MAC-IUE derivations as described in the Annex A.19 and Annex
A.20 respectively, to mitigate the replay attack. The AUSF shall send the
value of the CounterUPU (used to generate the UPU-MAC-IAUSF) along with the
UPU-MAC-IAUSF to the UE. The UE shall only accept CounterUPU value that is
greater than stored CounterUPU value. The UE shall update the stored
CounterUPU with the received CounterUPU, only if the verification of the
received UPU-MAC-IAUSF is successful. The UE shall use the CounterUPU
received from the UDM, when deriving the UPU-MAC-IUE for the UE Parameters
Upadate Data acknowledgement.

The AUSF and the UE shall maintain the CounterUPU for lifetime of the
KAUSF.

The AUSF that supports the UE parameters update using control plane
procedure shall initialize the CounterUPU to 0x00 0x01 when the newly
derived KAUSF is stored (see clause 6.2.2.1). The AUSF shall set the
CounterUPU to 0x00 0x02 after the first calculated UPU-MAC-IAUSF, and
monotonically increment it for each additional calculated UPU-MAC-IAUSF.
The UPU Counter value of 0x00 0x00 shall not be used to calculate the UPU-
MAC-IAUSF and UPU-MAC-IUE.

The AUSF shall suspend the UE Parameters Update protection service for the
UE, if the CounterUPU associated with the KAUSF of the UE, is about to wrap
around. When a fresh KAUSF is generated for the UE, the CounterUPU at the
AUSF is reset to 0x00 0x01 as defined above and the AUSF shall resume theUE
Parameters Update protection service for the UE.


6.16 Security handling in Cellular IoT


6.16.1 Security handling in Control Plane CIoT 5GS Optimization


6.16.1.1 Security procedures for Small Data Transfer in Control Plane CIoT
         5GS Optimisation

The Control Plane Optimisation for 5GS CIoT is used to exchange small user
data or SMS as payload of a NAS message in both uplink and downlink
directions. The UE and the AMF perform integrity protection and ciphering
for the small user data or SMS using NAS security context specific to the
NAS connection.

If UE uses Control Plane optimisation for 5GS CIoT for Mobile Originated
data transport, the UE sends a Control Plane Service Request message
including a container for small user data or SMS transport. The Control
Plane Service Request message shall be partially ciphered (i.e. the
container including uplink user data or SMS is ciphered, and non-cleartext
remains unciphered) and integrity protected by the current 5G NAS security
context specific to the NAS connection if such exists as depicted in TS
24.501 [35]. Upon reception of the Control Plane Service Request message
with the ciphered container for small user data or SMS transport, the AMF
shall verify integrity of the whole Control Plane Service Request message
and decipher the ciphered container to obtain the small user data or SMS.
When applying NAS ciphering/deciphering mechanism for the container, the
LENGTH value shall be set to the length of the container contents.

Additionally, if UE uses Control Plane optimisation for 5GS CIoT for Mobile
Originated data transport, the UE in CM-CONNECTED mode sends small user
data or SMS in UL NAS transport message to the AMF. The UL NAS transport
message shall be ciphered and integrity protected with the current 5G NAS
security context specific to the NAS connection. Upon reception of the UL
NAS transport message for small user data or SMS transport, the AMF shall
verify integrity and decipher the UL NAS transport message to obtain the
small user data or SMS.

If UE uses Control Plane optimisation for 5GS CIoT for Mobile Terminated
data transport, the UE obtains small user data or SMS in DL NAS transport
message from the AMF. The DL NAS transport message shall be ciphered and
integrity protected with the current 5G NAS security context specific to
the NAS connection. Upon reception of the DL NAS transport message for
small user data or SMS transport, the UE shall verify integrity and
decipher the DL NAS transport message to obtain the small user data or SMS.


6.16.1.2 Security procedures for RRCConnectionRe-establishment Procedure in
         Control Plane CIoT 5GS Optimization

If the UE experience a RLF when using Control Plane CIoT 5GS optimisation
only, the AS layer of the UE may trigger an RRCConnectionReestablishment
procedure. As there is no AS security available, this procedure can not be
protected as described in subclause 6.11.

In order to protect the the re-establishment procedure, the AS part of the
UE triggers the NAS part of the UE to provide the UL_NAS_MAC and
XDL_NAS_MAC. These parameter are used to show that the UE is requesting the
re-establishment and that the UE is talking to a genuine network
respectively.

The UE calculates a UL_NAS_MAC and XDL_NAS_MAC by using the curently used
NAS integrity algorithm with the following inputs, KNASint as the key, the
uplink NAS COUNT that would be used for the next uplink NAS message, the
DIRECTION bit set to 0 and the target Cell-ID as the message to be
protected to calculate NAS-MAC (see Annex D.3.1).

The uplink NAS COUNT is increased by the UE in exactly the same way as if
it had sent a NAS message. The first 16 bits of NAS-MAC form UL_NAS_MAC and
the last 16 bits form XDL_NAS_MAC, which is stored by the UE.

The UE shall send the RRCConnectionRestablishmentRequest message to the
target ng-eNB and shall include the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI (as described in TS
23.501 [2], TS23.003[19] and TS 36.331 [69]), the 5 least significant
bits (LSB) of the NAS COUNT that was used to calculate NAS-MAC and
UL_NAS_MAC in the message.

The target ng-eNB recognises the RRCConnectionRestablishmentRequest message
sent by a UE relates to the Control Plane CIoT 5GS optimisation based on
the presence of the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI in the message. The target ng-eNB
shall recreate the 5G-S-TMSI from the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI (as described in
TS 23.501 [2], TS23.003[19] and TS 36.331 [69]). The target ng-eNB shall
send the 5G-S-TMSI, LSB of NAS COUNT, UL_NAS_MAC and target Cell-ID in the
CP Relocation Indication message to the AMF that is serving the UE (this
can be deteremined by the S-TMSI).

The AMF uses LSB of NAS COUNT to estimate the full uplink NAS COUNT and
calculates XNAS-MAC (see Annex D.3.1) using the same inputs (i.e. estimated
uplink NAS COUNT, DIRECTION bit set to 0 and the target Cell-ID as the
message) as the UE used for calculating NAS-MAC. The AMF then compares the
received UL_NAS_MAC with the first 16 bits of XNAS-MAC and if these are
equal the network is sure that the geniune UE sent the
RRCConnectionRestablishmentRequest message. The stored uplink NAS COUNT in
the AMF is set as though the AMF received a sucessfully protected NAS
message using that NAS COUNT.

The AMF shall set DL_NAS_MAC to the last 16 bits of already calculated XNAS-
MAC and send DL_NAS_MAC to the target ng-eNB in the Connection
Establishment Indication message. The target ng-eNB shall send the
DL_NAS_MAC to the UE in the RRCConnectionReestablisment message. The UE
shall check that the received DL_NAS_MAC equal to the stored XDL_NAS_MAC.
If so, the UE shall complete the re-establishment procedure.


6.16.2 Security handling in User Plane CIoT 5GS Optimization


6.16.2.1 General

The purpose of this procedure is to allow the ng-eNB to suspend an RRC
connection to be resumed by the UE using User Plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation
at a later time. The UE may resume the RRC connection in the same or
different ng-eNB where the suspend took place. The UE and ng-eNB store the
AS security context at suspend and reactivate the AS security context at
resume.

The UE and the ng-eNB may also use EDT (Early Data Transmission) or PUR
(Preconfigured Uplink Resource) feature in this procedure, as defined in TS
36.300 [88] and TS 36.331 [69].


6.16.2.2 Connection Suspend

When the ng-eNB initiates the Connection Suspend procedure, it sends N2
Suspend Request message to the AMF.  Upon reception of the N2 Suspend
Request message, the AMF shall check its local policy. If the local policy
indicates that a new NH derivation is needed, the AMF shall increase its
locally kept NCC value by one and compute a fresh NH from its stored data
using the function defined in Annex A.10. The AMF shall store that fresh
{NH, NCC} pair and send it to the ng-eNB in the N2 Suspend Response
message.

Upon receipt of the N2 Suspend Response message from the AMF and if the
message includes a {NH, NCC} pair, the ng-eNB shall store the fresh {NH,
NCC} pair in the N2 Suspend Response message and remove any existing unused
stored {NH, NCC} pairs.

The ng-eNB shall send to the UE an RRC Release with releaseCause set to rrc-
suspend message that is ciphered and integrity protected in PDCP layer
using current AS security context. The ng-eNB shall include a fresh I-RNTI,
and an NCC in that RRC Release message. The I-RNTI is used for context
identification, and the UE ID part of the I-RNTI assigned by the ng-eNB
shall be different in consecutive suspends of the same UE. This is to avoid
tracking of UEs based on the I-RNTI. If the ng-eNB has a fresh and unused
pair of {NCC, NH}, the ng-eNB shall include the NCC in the RRC Release
message. Otherwise, the ng-eNB shall include the same NCC associated with
the current KgNB in the RRC Release message. The NCC is used for AS
security.

The ng-eNB shall delete the current AS keys KRRCenc, KUPenc (if available),
and KUPint (if available) after sending the RRC Release message to the UE,
but shall keep the current AS key KRRCint. If the sent NCC value is fresh
and belongs to an unused pair of {NCC, NH}, the ng-eNB shall save the pair
of {NCC, NH} in the current UE AS security context and shall delete the
current AS key KgNB. If the sent NCC value is equal to the NCC value
associated with the current KgNB, the ng-eNB shall keep the current AS key
KgNB and NCC. The ng-eNB shall store the sent I-RNTI together with the
current UE context including the remainder of the AS security context.

Upon receiving the RRC Release with releaseCause set to rrc-suspend message
from the ng-eNB, the UE shall decrypt the RRC Release message using the
KRRCenc key and verify that the integrity of the received the RRC Release
message is correct by checking the PDCP MAC-I. If this verification is
successful, then the UE shall take the received NCC value and save it as
stored NCC with the current UE context.


6.16.2.3 Connection Resume in CM-IDLE with Suspend to a new ng-eNB

When the UE using user plane CIoT 5GS Optimization decides to resume the
RRC connection in CM-IDLE with suspend, the UE sends the RRC Resume Request
message on SRB0 (i.e. it is not integrity protected). The UE shall include
I-RNTI and a ShortResumeMAC-I in RRC Resume Request message. The I-RNTI is
used for context identification and its value shall be the same as the I-
RNTI that the UE had received from the source ng-eNB in the RRC Release
with releaseCause set to rrc-suspend message in the source cell. The
ShortResumeMAC-I is a 16-bit message authentication token, the UE shall
calculate it using the integrity algorithm (EIA) in the stored AS security
context, which was negotiated between the UE and the source ng-eNB and the
current KRRCint with the following inputs:

-  KEY      : it shall be set to current KRRCint;

-  BEARER     : all its bits shall be set to 1.

-  DIRECTION  : its bit shall be set to 1;

-  COUNT    : all its bits shall be set to 1;

-  MESSAGE  : it shall be set to VarShortResumeMAC-Input as defined in TS
36.331 [69] for ng-eNB with the following inputs:

                source C-RNTI, source PCI, resume constant, target Cell-ID.

The source PCI and source C-RNTI are associated with the cell where the UE
was suspended. The target Cell-ID is the identity of the target cell where
the UE sends the RRC Resume Request message. The resume constant allows
differentiation of VarShortResumeMAC from VarShortMAC.

For protection of all RRC messages except RRC Reject message following the
sent RRC Resume Request message, the UE shall derive a KNG-RAN* using the
target PCI, target EARFCN-DL and the KgNB/NH based on either a horizontal
key derivation or a vertical key derivation as defined in clause 6.9.2.1.1
and Annex A.12. The UE shall further derive KRRCint, KRRCenc, KUPenc
(optionally), and KUPint (optionally) from the newly derived KNG-RAN*. Then
the UE resets all PDCP COUNTs to 0 and activates the new AS keys in PDCP
layer.

When the target ng-eNB receives the RRC Resume Request message from the UE,
the target ng-eNB extracts the I-RNTI from the RRC Resume Request message.
The target ng-eNB contacts the source ng-eNB based on the information in
the I-RNTI by sending an Xn-AP Retrieve UE Context Request message with the
following included: I-RNTI, ShortResumeMAC-I and target Cell-ID, in order
to allow the source ng-eNB to validate the UE request and to retrieve the
UE context including the UE 5G AS security context.

The source ng-eNB retrieves the stored UE context including the UE 5G AS
security context from its database using the I-RNTI. The source ng-eNB
verifies the shortResumeMAC-I using the current KRRCint key stored in the
retrieved UE 5G AS security context (calculating the shortResumeMAC-I in
the same way as described above). If the verification of the shortResumeMAC-
I is successful, then the source ng-eNB calculates KNG-RAN* using the
target cell PCI, target EARFCN-DL and the KgNB/NH in the current UE 5G AS
security context based on either a horizontal key derivation or a vertical
key derivation according to whether the source ng-eNB has an unused pair of
{NCC, NH} as described in Annex A.12. The source ng-eNB can obtain the
target PCI and target EARFCN-DL from a cell configuration database by means
of the target Cell-ID which was received from the target ng-eNB. Then the
source ng-eNB shall respond with an Xn-AP Retrieve UE Context Response
message to the target ng-eNB including the UE context that contains the UE
5G AS security context. The UE 5G AS security context sent to the target ng-
eNB shall include the newly derived KNG-RAN*, the NCC associated to the KNG-
RAN*, the UE EPS security capabilities, UP security policy, the UP security
activation status, and the ciphering and integrity algorithms used by the
UE with the source cell.

The target ng-eNB shall check if it supports the ciphering and integrity
algorithms the UE used with the last source cell. If the target ng-eNB does
not support the ciphering and integrity algorithms used in the last source
cell or if the target ng-eNB prefers to use different algorithms than the
source ng-eNB, then the target ng-eNB shall send an RRC Setup message on
SRB0 to the UE in order to proceed with RRC connection establishment as if
the UE was in RRC_IDLE (i.e., a fallback procedure).

If the target ng-eNB supports the ciphering and integrity algorithms used
with the last source cell and these algorithms are the chosen algorithms by
the target ng-eNB, the target ng-eNB shall derive new AS keys (RRC
integrity key, RRC encryption key and UP keys) using the algorithms the UE
used with the source cell and the received KNG-RAN*. The target ng-eNB
shall reset all PDCP COUNTs to 0 and activate the new keys in PDCP layer.
The target ng-eNB shall respond to the UE with an RRC Resume message on
SRB1 which is integrity protected and ciphered in PDCP layer using the new
RRC keys.

If the UP security activation status can be supported in the target ng-eNB,
the target ng-eNB shall use the UP security activations that the UE used at
the last source cell.

When the UE receives the RRC Resume message, the UE shall decrypt the
message using the KRRCenc that was derived based on the newly derived KNG-
RAN*. The UE shall also verify the RRC Resume message by verifying the PDCP
MAC-I using the KRRCint that was derived from the newly derived KNG-RAN* If
verification of the RRC Resume message is successful, the UE shall delete
the current KRRCint key and the UE shall save the KRRCint, KRRCenc, KUPenc
(optionally), and KUPint (optionally) from the newly derived KNG-RAN* as
part of the UE current AS security context. In this case, the UE shall send
the RRC Resume Complete message both integrity protected and ciphered to
the target ng-eNB on SRB1 using the current KRRCint and KRRCenc. The UE
shall use the UP security activations status to protect the UP data.

If the UE receives RRC Reject message from the target ng-eNB in response to
the RRC Resume Request message, the UE shall delete newly derived AS keys
used for connection resumption attempt, including newly derived KNG-RAN*,
newly derived RRC integrity key, RRC encryption key and UP keys, and keep
the current KRRCint and the KgNB/NH in its current AS context. In that
case, for the next resume to any target ng-eNB, the UE shall start with the
same AS security context as it had when it was suspended originally, i.e.,
same KgNB/NH shall act as base key for derivation of new KNG-RAN*.

After a successful resume, the target ng-eNB shall perform Path Switch
procedure with the AMF as is done in case of X2-handover. The AMF shall
verify the UE security capability as described in the clause 6.7.3.1, and
the SMF shall verify the UEs UP security policy as described in the clause
6.6.1.

When EDT or PUR feature is used, the UE shall use newly derived KUPenc to
encrypt the UL UP data according to the UP security activations before
transmitting the RRC Resume Request message, and send the encrypted UL UP
data in the PDCP layer with RRC Resume Request message to the target ng-
eNB. The target ng-eNB shall use newly derived KUPenc key to get the UL UP
data according to the UP security activations after retrieving UE context
from the source ng-eNB. The UE and the target eNB shall use the same KUPenc
key and UP security activation to protect the DL data (if included) in PDCP
layer in the RRC Release or RRC Resume message.

NOTE:  UP security policy is only applicable for UP ciphering as UP
integrity protection is not supported.


6.16.2.4 Connection Resume in CM-IDLE with Suspend to the same ng-eNB

The target ng-eNB may be the same as the source ng-eNB in the description
in the previous subclause. If so the single ng-eNB performs the roles of
both the source and target ng-eNB. In particular, a new KNG-RAN* shall be
derived even if the UE is resuming to the same cell from where it was
suspended. However, there is the following difference.

After a successful resume, the ng-eNB shall send N2 Resume Request message
to the AMF.  Upon reception of the N2 Resume Request message, the AMF shall
check its local policy. If the local policy in the AMF indicates that a new
NH derivation is needed, the AMF shall increase its locally kept NCC value
by one and compute a fresh NH from its stored data using the function
defined in Annex A.10. The AMF shall store that fresh pair and send it to
the ng-eNB in the N2 Resume Response message.

Upon receipt of the N2 Resume Response message from the AMF and if the
message includes a {NH, NCC} pair, the ng-eNB shall store the {NH, NCC}
pair in the N2 Resume Response message and remove any existing unused
stored {NH, NCC} pairs. The {NH, NCC} pair may be used in the next
suspend/resume or Xn handover procedures.


6.16.3 Protection of Non-IP Data Delivery (NIDD) interfaces

Functions for NIDD may be used to handle Mobile Originated (MO) and Mobile
Terminated (MT) communication with UEs, where the data used for the
communication is considered unstructured (which is also referred as Non-
IP).

Since the NEF exposes the NIDD API, TLS protection mechanism defined in
clause 12 shall be used for protection of NIDD interfaces.


6.16.4 Security handling in NAS based redirection from 5GS to EPS

When a UE initiates registration procedure with the AMF, the AMF may
redirect the UE from 5GC to EPC by including a EMM cause indicating to the
UE that it shall not use 5GC, as described in clause 5.31.3 in TS 23.501
[2]. The following requirements apply to Registration Reject message with
an EMM cause which indicates to the UE that the UE shall not use 5GC:

  -  the AMF shall only send such a Registration Reject message once NAS
  security has been established between the AMF and the UE; and

  -  the UE shall only act upon such Registration Reject message if
  received integrity protected and if UE has verified the integrity of the
  Registration Reject message successfully.

NOTE:  This solution does not apply to unauthenticated emergency calls.




7  Security for non-3GPP access to the 5G core network


7.1  General

Security for non-3GPP access to the 5G Core network is achieved by a
procedure using IKEv2 as defined in RFC 7296 [25] to set up one or more
IPsec ESP [4] security associations. The role of IKE initiator (or client)
is taken by the UE, and the role of IKE responder (or server) is taken by
the N3IWF.

During this procedure, the AMF delivers a key KN3IWF to the N3IWF. The AMF
derives the key KN3IWF from the key KAMF. The key KN3IWF is then used by UE
and N3IWF to complete authentication within IKEv2.

Security for trusted non-3GPP access to 5G Core network is defined in
clause 7A.

Trusted and untrusted Non-3GPP Access Networks are IP access networks that
use access technology whose specification is out of the scope of 3GPP.

Whether a non-3GPP IP access network is trusted or untrusted is not a
characteristic of the access network.

In non-roaming scenario it is the HPLMN's operator decision if a non-3GPP
IP access network is used as trusted or untrusted non-3GPP access Network.
When one or more of the security feature groups provided by the non-3GPP
access network are considered not sufficiently secure by the home operator,
the non-3GPP access may be identified as an untrusted non-3GPP access for
that operator. However, this policy decision may additionally be based
onreasons not related to security feature groups.

In roaming scenario, the UDM in HPLMN makes the final decision of whether a
non-3GPP IP access network is used as trusted or untrusted non-3GPP access
network based on the identities of the access network and the visited
network. The UDM may take the VPLMN's policy and capability returned from
the AMF or roaming agreement into account

For supporting multiple DNs, the same trust relationship shall apply to all
the DNs the UE connects to from a certain non-3GPP access network, i.e. it
shall not be possible to access one DN using the non-3GPP access network as
trusted, while access to another PDN using the same non-3GPP access network
as untrusted.


7.1a Determining trust relationship in the UE

There are various possibilities to determine the trust relationship in the
UE as it is described in TS 23.501 [2]. For example, the non-3GPP access
networks, which are trusted, can be pre-configured in the UE.  If the USIM
supports non-3GPP access networks service, the home network operator may
configure in the USIM a list of trusted non-3GPP access networks. In case
of pre-configured information in the UE, the list of trusted non-3GPP
access networks pre-configured by the home network operator in the USIM
shall take precedence over information pre-configured in the ME.


7.2  Security procedures


7.2.1  Authentication for Untrusted non-3GPP Access

This clause specifies how a UE is authenticated to 5G network via an
untrusted non-3GPP access network. It uses a vendor-specific EAP method
called "EAP-5G", utilizing the "Expanded" EAP type and the existing 3GPP
Vendor-Id, registered with IANA under the SMI Private Enterprise Code
registry. The "EAP-5G" method is used between the UE and the N3IWF and is
utilized for encapsulating NAS messages. If the UE needs to be
authenticated by the 3GPP home network, any of the authentication methods
as described in clause 6.1.3 can be used. The method is executed between
the UE and AUSF as shown below.

When possible, the UE shall be authenticated by reusing the existing UE NAS
security context in AMF.

[pic]

Figure 7.2.1-1: Authentication for untrusted non-3GPP access

1. The UE connects to an untrusted non-3GPP access network with procedures
outside the scope of 3GPP. When the UE decides to attach to 5GC network,
the UE selects an N3IWF in a 5G PLMN, as described in TS 23.501 [2] clause
6.3.6.

2. The UE proceeds with the establishment of an IPsec Security Association
(SA) with the selected N3IWF by initiating an IKE initial exchange
according to RFC 7296 [25]. After step 2 all subsequent IKE messages are
encrypted and integrity protected by using the IKE SA established in this
step.

3. The UE shall initiate an IKE_AUTH exchange by sending an IKE_AUTH
request message. The AUTH payload is not included in the IKE_AUTH request
message, which indicates that the IKE_AUTH exchange shall use EAP
signalling (in this case EAP-5G signalling). As per the RFC 7296 [25], in
the IDi the UE shall set the ID type as ID_KEY-ID in this message and set
its value equal to any random number. The UE shall not use its
GUTI/SUCI/SUPI as the Id in this step. If the UE is provisioned with the
N3IWF root certificate, it shall include the CERTREQ payload within the
IKE_AUTH request message to request N3IWFs certificate.

4. The N3IWF responds with an IKE_AUTH response message which includes the
N3IWF identity, the AUTH payload to protect the previous message it sent to
the UE (in the IKE_SA_INIT exchange) and an EAP-Request/5G-Start packet.
The EAP-Request/5G-Start packet informs the UE to initiate an EAP-5G
session, i.e. to start sending NAS messages encapsulated within EAP-5G
packets. If the UE has sent a CERTREQ payload in step 3, the N3IWF shall
also include the CERT payload including N3IWF certificate.

5. The UE shall validate the N3IWF certificate and shall confirm that the
N3IWF identity matches the N3IWF selected by the UE. An absence of the
certificate from the N3IWF if the UE had requested the certificate  or
unsuccessful identity confirmation shall result in a connection failure.
The UE shall send an IKE_AUTH request which includes an EAP-Response/5G-NAS
packet that contains a Registration Request message containing UE security
capabilities and the SUCI. If UE is already with the 5GC over 3GPP access
and there is an available security context, the UE shall integrity protect
the Registration Request message and shall send the 5G-GUTI instead of
SUCI. The N3IWF shall refrain from sending an EAP-Identity request. The UE
may ignore an EAP Identity request or respond with the SUCI it sent in the
Registration Request. If the UE has registrated to the same AMF through
3GPP access, and if this is the first time that the UE connects to the 5GC
through non-3GPP access, the value of corresponding UL NAS COUNT used for
integrity protection is 0; else it can use the existing non-3GPP specific
UL NAS COUNT for integrity protection

NOTE:  The N3IWF does not send an EAP-Identity request because the UE
includes its identity in the IKE_AUTH request in message 5. This is in line
with RFC 7296 [25], clause 3.16.

6. The N3IWF shall select an AMF as specified in TS 23.501 [2], clause
6.5.3. The N3IWF forwards the Registration Request received from the UE to
the AMF.

7. If the AMF receives a 5G-GUTI and the Registration is integrity
protected, it may use the security context to verify the integrity
protection as describe in clause 6.4.6. If the UE has registrated to the
same AMF through 3GPP access, and if this is the first time that the AMF
receives UEs NAS signalling through non-3GPP access, the value of
corresponding UL NAS COUNT used for integrity verification is 0; else it
can use the existing non-3GPP specific UL NAS COUNT for integrity
verification. If integrity is verified successfully, it indicates that UE
is authenticated by AMF.If integrity is verified successfully and no newer
security context has been activated over the 3GPP access, then step 8 to
step 11 may be skipped. If integrity is verified successfully and a newer
security context has been activated over the 3GPP access then
authentication may be skipped but the AMF shall activate the newer context
with a NAS SMC procedure as described in step 8 and onwards. Otherwise, the
AMF shall authenticate the UE.

If the AMF decides to authenticate the UE, it shall use one of the methods
from clause 6.1.3. In this case, the AMF shall send a key request to the
AUSF. The AUSF may initiate an authentication procedure as specified in
clause 6.1.3. Between AMF and UE, the authentication packets are
encapsulated within NAS authentication messages and the NAS authentication
messages are carried in N2 signalling between the AMF and N3IWF, and then
are encapsulated within EAP-5G/5G-NAS packets between the N3IWF and the UE.


In the final authentication message from the home network, the AUSF shall
send the anchor key KSEAF derived from KAUSF to the SEAF. The SEAF shall
derive the KAMF from KSEAF and send it to the AMF which is used by the AMF
to derive NAS security keys. If EAP-AKA' is used for authentication as
described in clause 6.1.3.1, then the AUSF shall include the EAP-Success.
The UE also derives the anchor key KSEAF and from that key it derives the
KAMF followed by NAS security keys. The NAS COUNTs associated with NAS
connection identifier "0x02" are set at the UE and AMF.

8. The AMF shall send a Security Mode Command (SMC) to the UE in order to
activate NAS security associated with NAS connection identifier "0x02".
This message is first sent to N3IWF (within an N2 message). If EAP-AKA' is
used for authentication, the AMF shall encapsulate the EAP-Success received
from AUSF within the SMC message.

9. The N3IWF shall forward the NAS SMC to UE within an EAP-Request/5G-NAS
packet.

10.  The UE completes the authentication (if initiated in step 7) and
creates a NAS security context or activates another one based on the
received ngKSI in the NAS SMC. UE shall respond to the NAS SMC it received
from the AMF based on the selected algorithms and parameters as described
in clause 6.7.2. The UE shall encapsulate the NAS SMC Complete in the EAP-
5G Response.

11. The N3IWF shall forward the NAS packet containing NAS SMC Complete to
the AMF over the N2 interface.

12. The AMF upon reception of the NAS SMC Complete from the UE or upon
success of integrity protection verification, initiates the NGAP procedure
to set up the AN context. AMF shall compute the N3IWF key, KN3IWF, using
the uplink NAS COUNT associated with NAS connection identifier "0x02" as
defined in Annex A.9 for the establishment of the IPsec SA between the UE
and the N3IWF and shall include it in the NGAP Initial Context Setup
Request sent to the N3IWF.

13. N3IWF sends an EAP-Success/EAP-5G to the UE upon reception of the NGAP
Initial Context Setup Request containing the N3IWF key, KN3IWF. This
completes the EAP-5G session and no further EAP-5G packets are exchanged.
If the N3IWF does not receive the KN3IWF from AMF, the N3IWF shall respond
with an EAP-Failure

14.  The IPsec SA is established between the UE and N3IWF by using the
N3IWF key KN3IWF that was created in the UE using the uplink NAS COUNT
associated with NAS connection identifier "0x02" as defined in Annex A.9
and was received by N3IWF from the AMF in step 12.

15. Upon successful establishment of the IPsec SA between the UE and the
N3IWF, the N3IWF shall send the NGAP Initial Context Setup Response message
to the AMF.

16. When NGAP Initial Context Setup Response for the UE is received by the
AMF, AMF shall send the NAS Registration Accept message for the UE over the
N2 towards the N3IWF.

17. Upon receiving the NAS Registration Accept message from the AMF, the
N3IWF shall forward it to the UE over the established IPsec SA. All further
NAS messages between the UE and the N3IWF shall be sent over the
established IPsec SA.




7A Security for trusted non-3GPP access to the 5G core network


7A.1 General

Security for trusted non-3GPP access to the 5G Core network is achieved
when the UE registers to the 5GC via the TNAN. The UE registers to 5GC and,
at the same time, it authenticates with the TNAN by using the EAP-5G
procedure, similar to the one used with the registration procedure for
untrusted non-3GPP access.

The link between the UE and the TNAN can be any data link (L2) that
supports EAP encapsulation. The requirement on the Ta interface between the
TNAP and TNGF can be found in clause 4.2.8.3.2 of TS 23.501[2]. The TNGF
terminates the EAP-5G signalling andfowards the NAS message to the 5GC when
the UE attempts to register to 5GC via the TNAN. The security relies on
Layer-2 security between UE and TNAP, which is a trusted entity so that no
IPSec encryption would be necessary between UE and TNGF, i.e. NULL
encryption is sufficient for the user plane and signalling.

NOTE: The encryption protection over Layer-2 between UE and TNAP is assumed
to be enabled.

Separate IPSec SAs may be used for NAS transport and PDU Sessions. At the
end of the UEs registration to 5GC, an IPSec SA (NWt) is established
between the UE and TNGF. This is used to protect NAS messages between the
UE and TNGF. Later when the UE initiates a PDU session establishment, the
TNGF initiates establishment of one or more IPSec child SAs per PDU
session. This results in additional IPSec SAs (NWt) to be setup between
the UE and TNGF-UP which are then for user plane transport between the two.

Clause 7A.2.4 describes how WLAN UEs that do not support 5GC NAS (N5CW)
register via trusted non-3GPP access. Those N5CW devices are able to
authenticate to the network with 3GPP credentials and register with the
help of an interworking function (TWIF) that provides the 5GC NAS protocol
stack towards the AMF.

As defined in clause 7.1, it is the home operator policy decision if a non-
3GPP access network is treated as trusted non-3GPP access network. When all
of the security domains in clause 4.1 of the present specification related
to the non-3GPP access network are considered sufficiently secure by the
home operator, the non-3GPP access may be identified as a trusted non-3GPP
access for that operator. However, this policy decision may additionally be
based on reasons not related to security feature groups.

NOTE: It is specified in clause 7.1a of the current document how the UE
gets the operator policy and how it will behave accordingly.


7A.2 Security procedures


7A.2.1 Authentication for trusted non-3GPP access

This clause specifies how a UE is authenticated to 5G network via a trusted
non-3GPP access network.

This is based on the specified procedure in TS 23.502 [8] clause 4.12a.2.2
"Registration procedure for trusted non-3GPP access". The authentication
procedure is similar to the authentication procedure for trusted non-3GPP
access defined in clause 7.2.1 with few differences, which are mentioned
below:

[pic]

Figure 7A.2.1-1: Registration  Authentication and PDU Session
establishment for trusted non-3GPP access

0. The UE selects a PLMN and a TNAN for connecting to this PLMN by using
the Trusted Non-3GPP Access Network selection procedure specified in TS
23.501 [2] clause 6.3.12. During this procedure, the UE discovers the PLMNs
with which the TNAN supports trusted connectivity (e.g. "5G connectivity").

1. A layer-2 connection is established between the UE and the TNAP. In case
of IEEE802.11[80], this step corresponds to an802.11[80] Association.
In case of PPP, this step corresponds to a PPP LCP negotiation. In other
types of non-3GPP access (e.g. Ethernet), this step may not be required.

2-3. An EAP authentication procedure is initiated. EAP messages shall be
encapsulated into layer-2 packets, e.g. into IEEE 802.3/802.1x packets,
into IEEE 802.11/802.1x packets, into PPP packets, etc. The UE provides a
NAI that triggers the TNAP to send an AAA request to a TNGF. Between the
TNAP and TNGF the EAP packets are encapsulated into AAA messages.

4-10.  An EAP-5G procedure is executed as specified in clause7.2.1with the
following modifications:

-  The EAP-5G packets shall not be encapsulated into IKEv2 packets. The UE
shall also include a UE Id in the AN parameters, e.g. a 5G-GUTI if
available from a prior registration to the same PLMN.

-  A KTNGF as specified in clause Annex A.9 (equivalentto KN3IWF) is
created in the UE and in the AMF after the successful authentication. The
KTNGF is transferred from the AMF to TNGF in step 10a (within the N2
Initial Context Setup Request).

-  The TNAP is a trusted entity. The TNGF shall generate the KTNAP as
specified in Annex A.22 and transfers it from TNGF to TNAP in step 10b
(within an AAA message).

-  After receiving the TNGF key from AMF in step 10a, the TNGF shall send
to UE an EAP-Request/5G-Notification packet containing the "TNGF Contact
Info", which includes the IP address of TNGF. After receiving an EAP-
Response/5G-Notification packet from the UE, the TNGF shall send message
10b containing the EAP-Success packet.

11.  The common TNAP key is used by the UE and TNAP to derive security keys
according to the applied non-3GPP technology and to establish a security
association to protect all subsequent traffic. In case of IEEE802.11[80],
the KTNAP is the Pairwise Master Key (PMK) and a 4-way handshake is
executed (see IEEE802.11[80]) which establishes a security context
between the WLAN AP and the UE that is used to protect unicast and
multicast traffic over the air. All messages between UE and TNAP are
encrypted and integrity protected from this step onwards.

NOTE 1: whether step 11 is performed out of the scope of this document. The
current procedure assumes the encryption protection over Layer-2 between UE
and TNAP is to be enabled.

12.  The UE receives IP configuration from the TNAN, e.g. with DHCP.

13.  The UE shall initiate an IKE_INIT exchange with the TNGF. The UE has
received the IP address of TNGF during the EAP-5G signalling in step 9b,
subsequently, the UE shall initiate an IKE_AUTH exchange andshall include
the same UE Id (i.e. SUCI or 5G-GUTI) as in the UE Id provided in step 5.
The common KTIPSe is used for mutual authentication. The key KTIPSec is
derived as specified in Annex A.22.NULL encryption is negotiated as
specified in RFC2410 [81]. After step 13c, an IPsec SA is established
between the UE and TNGF (i.e. a NWt connection) and it is used to transfer
all subsequent NAS messages. This IPsec SA does not apply encryption but
only apply integrity protection.

14.  After the NWtp connection is successfully established, the TNGF
responds to AMF with an N2 Initial Context Setup Response message.

15.  Finally, the NAS Registration Accept message is sent by the AMF and is
forwarded to UE via the established NWt connection.

16-18. The UE initiates a PDU session establishment. This is carried out
exactly as specified in TS 23.502 [8] clause 4.12a.5. The TNGF may
establish one or more IPSec child SAs per PDU session.

19. User plane data for the established PDU session is transported between
the UE and TNGF inside the established IPSec child SA.


7A.2.2 Void


7A.2.3 Key hierarchy for trusted non-3GPP access

The key hierarchy described in clause 6.2.1 applies, with the following
changes:

The key derived for non-3GPP access is called KTNGF in the context of
trusted access.

The key KTNGF received from AMF is used for two different purposes; to
setup IPSec SAs between the UE and the TNGF and to create WLAN keys between
the UE and the TNAP.

To separate the keys for these purposes, the key hierarchy in Figure 7A.2.3-
1 shall be used. The KTIPSec key is used to setup IPSec SAs and the KTNAP
key is used to setup access security.

The keys KTIPSec and KTNAP are derived as described in Clause A.22.

[pic]

Figure 7A.2.3-1 Key hierarchy for trusted non-3GPP access


7A.2.4 Authentication for devices that do not support 5GC NAS over WLAN
         access

A N5CW device is capable to register to 5GC with 3GPP credentials and to
establish 5GC connectivity via a trusted WLAN access network. The reference
architecture is captured in clause 4.2.8.5.2 of TS 23.501[2]. The 3GPP
credentials are stored as defined in clause 6.1.1.1. The Trusted WLAN
Interworking Function (TWIF) provides interworking functionality that
enables connectivity with 5GC and implements the NAS protocol stack and
exchanges NAS messages with the AMF on behalf of the N5CW device. A single
EAP-AKA authentication procedure is executed for connecting the N5CW
device both to the trusted WLAN access network and to the 5G core network.

[pic]

Figure 7A.2.4-1: Authentication Procedure for N5CW

0. The N5CW device selects a PLMN and a trusted WLAN that supports "5G
connectivity-without-NAS" to this PLMN by using the procedure specified in
TS 23.501 [2] clause 6.3.12a, "Access Network selection for devices that do
not support 5GC NAS over WLAN".

Steps 1-10: Initial registration to 5GC.

1. The N5CW device associates with the trusted WLAN network and the EAP-
AKA authentication procedure is initiated.

2. The N5CW device shall provide its Network Access Identity (NAI) The
Trusted WLAN Access Point (TWAP) selects a Trusted WLAN Interworking
Function (TWIF), e.g. based on the received realm, and sends an AAA request
to the selected TWIF.

If the N5CW device registers to 5GC over 3GPP access for the first time
when the above procedure is initiated, then the NAI shall include the SUCI.
The SUCI shall be constructed as specified in clause 6.12.2.

If the N5CW device has registered to 5GC over 3GPP access when the above
procedure is initiated, then the NAI includes the 5G-GUTI assigned to the
N5CW device over 3GPP access. This enables the TWIF in step 4a below to
select the same AMF as the one serving the N5CW device over 3GPP access.

3. The TWIF shall create a 5GC Registration Request message on behalf of
the N5CW device. The TWIF shall use default values to populate the
parameters in the Registration Request message, which are the same for all
N5CW device that do not support 5G NAS. The Registration type indicates
"Initial Registration".

4. The TWIF shall select an AMF (e.g. by using the 5G-GUTI in the NAI, if
provided by the N5CW device) and shall send an N2 message to the AMF
including the Registration Request, the User Location and an AN Type.

5. In case the AMF triggers an authentication procedure, it sends a request
to AUSF by sending Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message. The
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message contains SUCI or SUPI
(in case of a valid 5G-GUTI is received by the AMF). The request message
contains also an indication that the request is from a N5CW device.

6. The AUSF shall send Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request to the UDM
including SUCI or SUPI and the N5CW indication.

7. Upon reception of the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request, the UDM shall
invoke SIDF if a SUCI is received. SIDF shall de-conceal SUCI to gain SUPI
before UDM can process the request. The UDM may select an authentication
method based on the "realm" part of the SUPI, the N5CW device indicator, a
combination of the "realm" part and the N5CW device indicator, or the UDM
local policy.

8. The EAP-AKA procedure will be trigged to perform mutual authentication
between the N5CW device and the home network as specified in clause
6.1.3.1.

 EAP-AKA' takes place between the N5CW device and AUSF. Over the N2
interface, the EAP messages are encapsulated within NAS Authentication
messages. The EAP-AKA messages exchanged between the N5CW Device and the
TWIF shall be encapsulated into the layer-2 packets, e.g. into IEEE
802.3/802.1x packets, into IEEE 802.11/802.1x packets, into PPP packets,
etc.

9. The NAS security context is not be required in this scenario. The AMF
shall derive an KTWIF key from the received KAMF key as specified in Annex
A.9. NAS security between AMF and TWIF is established similar to
unauthenticated emergency calls, i.e. with NULL encryption and NULL
integrity protection.

10a. The AMF shall send NAS Security Mode Command to the TWIF. The NAS
Security Mode Command shall contain the EAP-Success message and the NULL
security algorithms.

10b. The TWIF shall not forward the EAP-Success to the N5CW directly,
instead, it shall store the EAP-Success message and wait for KTWIF.

10c. The TWIF shall send the NAS Security Mode Complete message to the AMF.

11.  The AMF sends an N2 Initial Context Setup Request and provides the
KTWIF key to TWIF.

12.    The TWIF shall derive a TNAP key, KTNAP, from the KTNGF key as
specified in Appendix A.22 and send the TNAP key and the EAP-Success
message to the Trusted WLAN Access Point, which forwards the EAP-Success to
the N5CW device. The TNAP key corresponds to the PMK (Pairwise Master Key)
which is  used to secure the WLAN air-interface communication according to
IEEE802.11[80]. A layer-2 or layer-3 connection is established between
the Trusted WLAN Access Point and the TWIF for transporting all user-plane
traffic of the N5CW device to TWIF. This connection is later bound to an N3
connection that is created for this N5CW device.

13. The TWIF shall send N2 Initial Context Setup Response message to the
AMF.

14. The following steps are captured in clause 4.12b.2 of TS 23.502[8].


7B Security for wireline access to the 5G core network


7B.1 General

To support Wireless and Wireline Convergence for the 5G system, two new
network entities, 5G-RG and FN-RG, are introduced in the architecture
specificaction TS 23.501[2].

The 5G-RG acts as a 5G UE and can connect to 5GC via wireline access
network (W-5GAN) or via Fixed Wireless Access (FWA). Existing security
procedures defined in this document are reused.

The FN-RG can connect to 5GC via wireline access network (W-5GAN). The W-
AGF performs the registration procedure on behalf of the FN-RG. It acts as
end point of N1 and provides the NAS signalling connection to the 5GC on
behalf of the FN-RG.

A 5G -capable UE can connect to 5GC through an RG thats connected to the
5GC via wireline access network (W-5GAN) or NG-RAN. The UE supports
untrusted non-3GPP access and/or trusted non-3GPP access.

NOTE: Roaming of FN-RG and 5G-RG are not supported.

NOTE: Informative Annex X provides an example of how N5GC devices behind a
residential gateway in private or in isolated scenarios with wireline
access make use of additional EAP methods for authentication.


7B.2 Authentication for 5G-RG

The 5G-RG can be connected to 5GC via W-5GAN, NG RAN or via both accesses.
The registration procedure for the 5G-RG connecting to 5GC via NG-RAN is
specified in TS 23.316 [79] clause 4.11. The registration procedure for the
5G-RG connecting to 5GC via W-5GAN is specified in TS 23.316 [79] clause
7.2.1.

The Untrusted non-3GPP access procedure defined in clause 7.2.1 is used as
the basis for registration of the 5G-RG. The 5G-RG shall support both 5G-
AKA and EAP-AKA and it shall be authenticated by the 3GPP home network.
The 5G-RG is equivalent to a normal UE.

As 5G-RG is a UE from 5GC point of view, the authentication framework
defined in clause 6.1.3 shall be used to authenticate the 5G-RG.

In case of 5G-RG connects to 5GC via 5G-RAN, comparing to clause 6.1, the
difference is:

-  UE is replaced by 5G-RG.

In case of 5G-RG connects to 5GC via W-5GAN, the "EAP-5G" method shall be
used between the 5G-RG and the W-5GAN, and is utilized for encapsulating
NAS message. The authentication method is executed between the 5G-RG and
AUSF as shown below.

[pic]

Figure 7B.2-1 5G-RG authentication procedure

1. 5G-RG establishes a W-CP connection with a W-5GAN. The detail of
connection is out of the scope of 3GPP.

2. The W-AGF shall send an EAP-Request/5G-Start message over the W-CP
connection to the 5G-RG.  The EAP-Request/5G-Start packet informs the 5G-RG
to initiate an EAP-5G session, i.e. to start sending NAS messages
encapsulated within EAP-5G packets.

  3. The 5G-RG shall send an EAP-Response/5G-NAS packet that contains a
    Registration message containing UE security capabilities and the SUCI.
    If there is an available security context, the 5G-RG shall integrity
    protect the Registration Request message and shall send the 5G-GUTI
    instead of SUCI. If the 5G-RG has registrated to the same AMF through
    NG RAN, and if this is the first time that the 5G-RG connects to the
    5GC throughW-5GAN, the value of corresponding UL NAS COUNT used for
    integrity protection is 0; else it can use the existing non-3GPP
    specific UL NAS COUNT for integrity protection.

   NOTE:  Since the 5G-RG will not use non-3GPP access, and to avoid to
   creat new category of security context, so the non-3GPP specific security
   context is used to refer to the security context that 5G-RG is used
   through wireline access.

4. The W-AGF shall select an AMF as specified in TS 23.316[79]. The W-AGF
shall then forward the Registration Request received from the UE to the
selected AMF within an N2 initial UE message

5. If the AMF receives a 5G-GUTI and the Registration is integrity
protected, it may use the security context to verify the integrity
protection as describe in clause 6.4.6. If the 5G-RG has registered to the
same AMF through NG RAN, and if this is the first time that the AMF
receives UEs NAS signalling through wireline access, the value of
corresponding UL NAS COUNT used for integrity verification is 0; else it
can use the existing non-3GPP specific UL NAS COUNT for integrity
verification. If integrity is verified successfully, it indicates that 5G-
RG is authenticated by AMF. If integrity is verified successfully and no
newer security context has been activated over the NG RAN, then step 8 to
step 11 may be skipped. If integrity is verified successfully and a newer
security context has been activated over the NG RAN then authentication may
be skipped but the AMF shall activate the newer context with a NAS SMC
procedure as described in step 8 and onwards. Otherwise, the AMF shall
authenticate the 5G-RG.

    If the AMF decides to authenticate the 5G-RG, it shall use one of the
    methods from clause 6.1.3. In this case, the AMF shall send a key
    request to the AUSF. The AUSF may initiate an authentication procedure
    as specified in clause 6.1.3. Between AMF and UE, the authentication
    packets are encapsulated within NAS authentication messages and the NAS
    authentication messages are carried in N2 signalling between the AMF
    and W-AGF, and then are encapsulated within EAP-5G/5G-NAS packets
    between the W-AGF and the UE.

    In the final authentication message from the home network, the AUSF
    shall send the anchor key KSEAF derived from KAUSF to the SEAF. The
    SEAF shall derive the KAMF from KSEAF and send it to the AMF which is
    used by the AMF to derive NAS security keys. If EAP-AKA' is used for
    authentication as described in clause 6.1.3.1, then the AUSF shall
    include the EAP-Success. The 5G-RG also derives the anchor key KSEAF
    and from that key it derives the KAMF followed by NAS security keys.
    The NAS COUNTs associated with NAS connection identifier "0x02" are set
    at the 5G-RG and AMF.

6. The AMF shall send a Security Mode Command (SMC) to the UE in order to
activate NAS security associated with NAS connection identifier "0x02".
This message is first sent to W-AGF (within an N2 message). If EAP-AKA' is
used for authentication, the AMF shall encapsulate the EAP-Success received
from AUSF within the SMC message.

7. The W-AGF shall forward the NAS SMC to 5G-RG within an EAP-Request/5G-
NAS packet.

8. The W-AGF shall forward the NAS packet containing NAS SMC Complete to
the AMF over the N2 interface.

9. The AMF upon reception of the NAS SMC Complete from the UE or upon
success of integrity protection verification, initiates the NGAP procedure
to set up the AN context. AMF shall compute the W-AGF key, KWAGF that is an
equvilant to key KN3IWF, using the uplink NAS COUNT associated with NAS
connection identifier "0x02" as defined in Annex A.9.

10.  Upon receiving NAS Security Mode Complete, the AMF shall send an N2
Initial Context Setup Request message to the W-AGF. The message contains
the KWAGF.

NOTE:  Whether the key KWAGF is used by the 5G-RG and W-AGF is out of the
scope of 3GPP.

11. W-AGF shall send an EAP-Success/EAP-5G to the 5G-RG upon reception of
the NGAP Initial Context Setup Request message. This completes the EAP-5G
session and no further EAP-5G packets are exchanged.

12.  Upon receiving the NAS Registration Accept message from the AMF, the W-
AGF shall forward it to the 5G-RG over the established W-CP. All further
NAS messages between the UE and the W-AGF shall be sent over the
established W-CP.


7B.3 Authentication for FN-RG

The FN-RG connects to 5GC via W-5GAN, which has the W-AGF function that
provides connectivity to the 5GC via N2 and N3 reference points. Since the
FN-RG is a non-wireless entity defined by BBF or CableLabs, it doesnt
support N1. The W-AGF provides N1 connectivity on behalf of the FN-RG. The
authentication method is executed between the FN-RG and AUSF as shown in
Figure 7B.c.

The W-AGF may authenticate the FN-RG; this is controlled by local policies.

It is assumed that there is a trust relationship between the wireline
operator that manages the W-5GAN and the PLMN operator managing the 5GC.
The AMF trusts the W-5GAN based on mutual authentication executed when
security is established on the interface between the two using NDS/IP or
DTLS.



[pic]

Figure7B.c FN-RG authentication procedure

1. A layer-2 (L2) connection is established between the FN-RG and the FAGF
function in the W-AGF.

2. The FN-RG is authenticated by the W-AGF. Authentication method used for
FN-RG is defined by BBF or CableLabs and out of scope of 3GPP.

3-4. The W-AGF shall perform initial registration on behalf of the FN-RG.
The W-AGF shall generate a Registration Request message and send it to the
AMF over N2. The Registration Request message contains the SUCI of the FN-
RG. The N2 message contains an indication that the W-AGF has authenticated
the FN-RG.

5. The AMF shall select an AUSF based on the received SUCI. The AMF shall
send a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message to the AUSF. It
contains the SUCI of the FN-RG. It also contains the authenticated
indication generated by the W-AGF.

6. The AUSF shall send a Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request to the UDM. It
contains the SUCI of the FN-RG and the authenticated indication.

7. The UDM shall invoke the SIDF and maps the SUCI to the SUPI.

8. The UDM decides, based on the subscription profile of the SUPI and the
authenticated indication that authentication has been completed by the W-
5GAN, that authentication by the home network is not required for the FN-
RG.

9. The UDM shall send a Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response to the AUSF. It
contains the SUPI of the FN-RG and an indication that authentication by the
home network is not required.

10. After checking the indication set by the UDM, The AUSF shall not
perform authentication and shall send a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response to the AMF. It contains the SUPI of the FN-RG and the indication
that authentication by the home network is not required set by the UDM.

This response from AUSF indicates that authentication is not required, and
no KSEAF is included.

11. After checking the indication to make sure that the authentication by
the home network is not required, the AMF shall estabilish the NAS security
between AMF and W-AGF with NULL encryption and NULL integrity protection.

12. The AMF shall send Registration Accept message to the W-AGF. This
message contains 5G-GUTI and other parameters.

13. The W-AGF shall send a Registration Complete message back to the AMF.
The W-AGF shall store the 5G-GUTI for use in later NAS procedures.


7B.4 Authentication for UE behind 5G-RG and FN-RG

A UE that is connected to a 5G-RG or FN-RG, can access the 5GC via the
N3IWF or via the TNGF.

A UE behind a FN-RG can use the untrusted non-3GPP access procedure as
defined in TS 23.502[2] clause 4.12.2.2 to access the 5GC via the N3IWF.

A UE behind a 5G-RG can use either the untrusted non-3GPP access as defined
in TS 23.502[2] clause 4.12.2.2, or trusted N3GPP-access as defined in TS
23.502 [2] clause 4.12a.2.2.

When the UE uses untrusted non-3GPP access, the authentication of the UE is
as specified in clause 7.2.1.

When the UE uses trusted non-3GPP access, the authentication of the UE is
as specified in clause 7A.2.1.


7B.5 Subscriber privacy for wireline access

The requirements and procedures on the UE related to subscriber privacy in
clauses 5.2.5, 6.12 and Annex C are applicable for the 5G-RG.

NOTE 1: The requirements and procedures on the UE related to subscriber
privacy in clauses 5.2.5, 6.12 and Annex C are not applicable for the FG-
RG.

NOTE 2: When the SUPI contains a GCI, the 5G-CRG can use the null scheme to
construct the SUCI.

For a W-AGF representing an FN-RG, the null scheme shall be used to
construct the SUCI as described in clauses 4.7.3 and 4.7.4 in TS 23.316
[79].


7B.6 Subscriber privacy for N5CW over trusted WLAN access

The requirements and procedures on the UE related to subscriber privacy in
clauses 5.2.5, 6.12 and Annex C are applicable for the N5CW.


8  Security of interworking


8.1  General

As described in TS 23.501 [2], in order to interwork with EPC, the UE can
operate in Single Registration or Dual Registration mode.

When operating in Dual Registration mode, the UE shall independently
maintain and use two different security contexts, an EPS security context
to interact with the Evolved Packet System and a 5G security context to
interact with the 5G System. Therefore, during inter-system mobility, when
the target system is EPS, the UE shall take into use the EPS security
context and hence all the security mechanisms described in TS 33.401 [10]
are applicable. In the other direction, i.e. when the target system is the
5GC, the UE shall take into use the 5G security context and hence all the
security mechanisms described in the present document are applicable.

When operating in Single Registration mode, there are two cases depending
on the support of the N26 interface between the AMF and the MME. In both
cases the security mechanisms described in all the subsequent sub-clauses
are applicable.


8.2  Registration procedure for mobility from EPS to 5GS over N26

During mobility from EPS to 5GS, the security handling described below
shall apply.

When the UE performs idle mode mobility from EPS to 5GS, and if the UE has
a native non-current 5G context, then the UE shall make the native non-
current 5G context as the current one. The UE shall discard any mapped 5G
security context.

The UE shall include the UE 5G security capability alongside the mapped 5G
GUTI in the Registration Request message. The UE shall also include the 5G
GUTI and the ngKSI that identify a current 5G security context if
available, e.g. established during an earlier visit to 5G, and integrity
protect the Registration Request using the selected security algorithms in
the current 5G NAS security context as it is performed for a 5G NAS message
over a 3GPP access. If the UE has no current 5G security context then the
UE shall send the Registration Request message without integrity
protection.The Registration Request shall contain the TAU request integrity
protected using the EPS NAS security context shared with the source MME as
it is performed for a LTE NAS message, then the UE shall increment its
stored uplink EPS NAS COUNT value by one.

NOTE: The enclosed TAU request in the Registration Request contains a
complete TAU Request.

Upon receipt of the Registration Request, the AMF shall interact with the
MME identified by the mapped 5G GUTI to retrieve the UE context. The AMF
shall include the enclosed TAU request in the Context Request message to
the MME. The MME shall verify the TAU request using the stored UE security
context and if the verification is successful, the MME shall send the UE
context to the AMF.

The AMF shall verify the integrity of the Registration Request message if
the AMF obtained the 5G security context identified by the 5G GUTI. In case
the verification succeeds then the AMF shall then dispose of any EPS
security parameters received from the source MME in the Context Response
message. In case the verification fails or the 5G UE context is not
available then the AMF shall treat the Registration Request message as if
it was unprotected. In such case, the AMF may either derive a mapped 5G
security context from the EPS context received from the source MME as
described in clause 8.6.2 or initiate a primary authentication procedure to
create a new native 5G security context.

If the AMF derives a mapped 5G security context from the EPS security
context, then the ngKSI associated with the newly derived mapped 5G
security context and the uplink and downlink 5G NAS COUNTs are defined and
set as described in clause 8.6.2. If the Registration Request contains a
TAU Request message, the network shall use the uplink EPS NAS COUNT
corresponding to the TAU Request message for deriving the KAMF' from the
KASME. The AMF shall use and include the ngKSI to the UE in NAS SMC
procedure, for the UE to identify the EPS security context used for the
derivation of a mapped 5G security context.  If a mapped 5G security
context is created or the native 5G security context has been changed
(e.g., due to a new KAMF' derivation or NAS algorithm change), the AMF
shall activate the resulting 5G security context by a NAS SMC procedure.
When a mapped 5G security context is created, the AMF shall store the
selected EPS NAS security algorithms in the mapped 5G security context and
include them in the NAS Security Mode Command.

If the AMF wants to continue to use the native 5G security context used by
the UE to protect the Registration Request, the AMF may skip the NAS SMC
procedure and send the Registration Accept message protected using the
native 5G security context identified by the 5G-GUTI and the ngKSI included
in the Registration Request message.

In case the type value in the received ngKSI in NAS SMC indicates a mapped
security context, then the UE shall use the value field in the received
ngKSI to identify the EPS security context from which the UE derives the
mapped 5G security context as described in clause 8.6.2. The UE shall
activate the mapped 5G security context to verify the integrity protection
of the NAS SMC as it is performed for a 5G NAS message over a 3GPP access.

The Registration Accept message shall be protected by the new mapped 5G
security context (if a mapped 5G security context was activated by NAS SMC)
or by the new native 5G security context (if a new native 5G security
context was activated by NAS SMC) as it is performed for a 5G NAS message
over a 3GPP access. Otherwise, the current native 5G security context shall
be used. If the AMF chooses to derive an initial KgNB from a new KAMF key
(either the mapped KAMF' key or the native KAMF key), then the initial KgNB
is derived as specified in Annex A.9 using the start value of the uplink 5G
NAS COUNT protecting the NAS Security Mode Command Complete message and an
access type distinguisher set to "3GPP access". If the UE receives an AS
SMC message, then the UE shall derive an initial KgNB from a new KAMF key
in the same way as the AMF.


8.3  Handover procedure from 5GS to EPS over N26


8.3.1  General

This subclause covers the case of handover from 5GS to EPS, as defined in
TS 23.502 [8].


8.3.2  Procedure



[pic]

Figure 8.3.2-1 Handover from 5GS to EPC over N26

NOTE 1:  This procedure is based on clause 4.11.1.2.1 in TS 23.502 and only
includes steps and description that are relevant to security.

If the UE is initially registered and connected to the 5GC, the 5GC has a
current security context for the UE. The current 5G security context may be
a mapped 5G security context resulting from a previous mobility from EPC,
or a native 5G security context resulting from a primary authentication
with the 5GC.

1. The gNB/ng-eNB sends a Handover Required message to the AMF, including
UEs identity .

2. When the source AMF performs a handover procedure to the EPC, after
checking the UE's access rights and security capabilities, the source AMF
shall prepare a UE context including a mapped EPS security context for the
target MME. To construct the mapped EPS security context, the source AMF
shall derive a KASME using the KAMF key and the current downlink 5G NAS
COUNT of the current 5G security context as described in clause 8.6.1 and
then increments its stored downlink 5G NAS COUNT value by one.

The source AMF shall select the EPS NAS algorithms identifiers (it has
stored) to be used in the target MME at interworking handover to EPS, for
encryption and integrity protection.

NOTE 2:  A legacy target MME is expecting to receive the selected EPS NAS
algorithms identifiers over N26 from the source AMF as the target MME
believes the source AMF is another MME. The source AMF has therefore
provisioned the EPS NAS security algorithms identifiers to be used at
interworking handover to EPS to the UE in the 5G NAS SMC in 5G access as
described in clause 6.7.2. The target MME could re-select different EPS NAS
algorithms though to be used with the UE by running a NAS SMC in the
following Tracking Area Update procedure.

The uplink and downlink EPS NAS COUNT associated with the newly derived
KASME' key are set to the values as described in clause 8.6.1. The eKSI for
the newly derived KASME' key is defined as described in clause 8.6.1.

The source AMF shall also derive the initial KeNB key from the KASME' key
and the uplink NAS COUNT as specified in Annex A.3 of TS 33.401 [10] using
232-1 as the value of the uplink NAS COUNT parameter.

NOTE 3:  The source AMF and the UE only uses the 232-1 as the value of the
uplink NAS COUNT for the purpose of deriving KeNB and do not actually set
the uplink NAS COUNT to 232-1. The reason for choosing such a value not in
the normal NAS COUNT range, i.e., [0, 224-1] is to avoid any possibility
that the value may be used to derive the same KeNB again.

The source AMF subsequently derives NH two times as specified in clause A.4
of TS 33.401 [10]. The {NH, NCC=2} pair is provided to the target MME as a
part of UE security context in the Forward Relocation Request message.

3. The source AMF shall transfer the UE security context (including new
KASME', eKSI, uplink and downlink EPS NAS COUNTs, UE EPS security
capabilities, selected EPS NAS algorithms identifiers) to the target MME in
the Forward Relocation Request message. The UE NR security capabilities may
be sent by the source AMF as well.

4. When the target MME receives Forward Relocation Request message from
source AMF, then the target MME shall derive EPS NAS keys (i.e., KNASenc
and KNASint) from the received KASME' key with the received EPS NAS
security algorithm identifiers as input, to be used in EPC as described in
Annex A.7 in TS 33.401 [10]. The target MME needs to include the {NH,
NCC=2} pair and the UE security capabilities in the S1 HANDOVER REQUEST
message to the target LTE eNB. The UE security capabilities include the UE
EPS security capabilities received from the source AMF.

5. Upon receipt of the S1 HANDOVER REQUEST from the target MME, the target
LTE eNB selects AS security algorithmsfrom the UE EPS security capabilities
as described in clause 7.2.4.2.3 in TS33.401[10] and computes the KeNB to
be used with the UE and proceed as described in clause 7.2.8.4.3 in TS
33.401[10]. The target LTE eNB then sends the selected AS security
algorithms in the target to source transparent container in the S1 Handover
Request Ack Message to the target MME.

6. The target MME shall include the target to source transparent container
received from the target LTE eNB in the Forward Relocation Response message
sent to the source AMF.

7. The source AMF shall include the target to source transparent container
and the 8 LSB of the downlink NAS COUNT value used in KASME derivation in
step 2, in the Handover command sent to the source gNB/ng-eNB.

8. The source gNB/ng-eNB shall include the target to source transparent
container and the 8 LSB of the downlink NAS COUNT value in the Handover
command sent to the UE.

   Upon the reception of the Handover Command message, the UE shall
estimate the downlink NAS COUNT value using the received 8 LSB of the
downlink NAS COUNT value and its stored downlink NAS COUNT value. The UE
shall ensure that the estimated downlink NAS COUNT value is greater than
the stored downlink NAS COUNT value. Then, the UE shall derive the mapped
EPS security context, i.e. derive KASME' from KAMF as described in clause
8.6.1 using the estimated downlink 5G NAS COUNT value. After the derivation
the UE shall set the downlink NAS COUNT value in the 5G NAS security
context to the received downlink NAS COUNT value.

9. The eKSI for the newly derived KASME' key is defined as described in
clause 8.6.1. The UE shall also derive the EPS NAS keys (i.e. KNASenc and
KNASint) as the MME did in step 4 using the EPS NAS security algorithms
identifiers stored in the ME and provisioned by the AMF to the UE in 5G NAS
SMC in earlier 5G access. The UE shall also derive the initial KeNB from
the KASME' and the uplink NAS COUNT as specified in Annex A.3 of TS 33.401
[10] using 232-1 as the value of the uplink NAS COUNT parameter.

The UE shall also derive the {NH, NCC=2} pair as described in A.4 of TS
33.401 [10] and further derive the KeNB to be used with the UE by
performing the key derivation defined in Annex A.5 in TS 33.401[10]. The UE
shall derive the AS RRC keys and the AS UP keys based on the KeNB and the
received AS EPS security algorithms identifiers selected by the target eNB
as described in Annex A.7 in TS 33.401 [10]. The uplink and downlink EPS
NAS COUNT associated with the derived EPS NAS keys are set to the values as
described in clause 8.6.1. The UE shall immediately take into use the newly
created mapped EPS security context, both for NAS and AS communication.

10.  The UE sends the Handover Complete message to the target LTE eNB. The
UE shall cipher and integrity protect this message using the newly created
mapped EPS security context.

11.  The target LTE eNB notifies the target MME with a Handover Notify
message.

After successful completion of the Handover procedure, the UE shall delete
any mapped 5G security context.

After deleting the mapped 5G security context, if the UE has a full non-
current native 5G NAS security context then the UE shall make the non-
current native 5G NAS security context the current one.


8.4  Handover from EPS to 5GS over N26


8.4.1  General

This clause covers the case of handoff from EPS to 5GS, as defined in TS
23.502 [8].


8.4.2  Procedure

[pic]

Figure 8.4.2-1: Handover from EPS to 5GS over N26

NOTE 1:  This procedure is based on clause 4.11.1.2.2 in TS 23.502 [8] and
only includes steps and description that are relevant to security.

As the UE is connected to the EPS, the source MME has a current EPS
security context for the UE. The current EPS security context may be a
mapped EPS security context resulting from a previous mobility from 5GC, or
a native EPS security context resulting from a primary authentication with
the EPS.

1. The source eNB sends a Handover Required message to the source MME,
including UE's identity .

NOTE 2:  The source MME checks whether the UE's security capabilities and
access rights are valid in order to decide whether it can initiate handover
to 5GS.

2. The source MME selects the target AMF and sends a Forward Relocation
Request to the selected target AMF. The source MME includes UE's EPS
security context including KASME, eKSI, UE EPS security capabilities,
selected EPS NAS algorithm identifiers, uplink and downlink EPS NAS COUNTs,
{NH, NCC} pair, in this message. If the source MME has the UE NR security
capabilities stored, then it will forward the UE NR security capabilities
as well to the target AMF.

3. The target AMF shall construct a mapped 5G security context from the EPS
security context received from the source MME. The target AMF shall derive
a mapped KAMF' key from the received KASME and the NH value in the EPS
security context received from the source MME as described in clause 8.6.2.


If the target AMF receives the UE 5G security capabilities, then the target
AMF shall select the 5G NAS security algorithms (to be used in the target
AMF for encryption and integrity protection) which have the highest
priority from its configured list.

If the target AMF does not receive the UE 5G security capabilities from the
source MME, then the target AMF shall assume that the following default set
of 5G security algorithms are supported by the UE (and shall set the UE 5G
security capabilities in the mapped 5G NAS security context according to
this default set):

a. NEA0, 128-NEA1 and 128-NEA2 for NAS signalling ciphering, RRC signalling
ciphering and UP ciphering;

b. 128-NIA1 and 128-NIA2 for NAS signalling integrity protection, RRC
signalling integrity protection and UP integrity protection.

The target AMF then derives the complete mapped 5G security context. The
target AMF shall derive the 5G NAS keys (i.e., KNASenc and KNASint) from
the new KAMF' with the selected 5G NAS security algorithm identifiers as
input, to be used in AMF as described in clause A.8. The uplink and
downlink 5G NAS COUNTs associated with the derived 5G NAS keys are set to
the value as described in clause 8.6. 2. The ngKSI for the newly derived
KAMF' key is defined such as the value is taken from the eKSI of the KASME
key (i.e. included in the received EPS security context) and the type is
set to indicate a mapped security context. The target AMF shall store the
EPS NAS security algorithms received from the source MME in the mapped 5G
security context. Similar to N2-Handover defined in Clause 6.9.2.3.3, the
target AMF shall also set the NCC to zero and shall further derive the
temporary KgNB using the mapped KAMF' key and the uplink NAS COUNT value of
232-1 as specified in Annex A.9.

The target AMF associates this mapped 5G Security context with ngKSI.

NOTE 3:  The target AMF derives a temporary KgNB using the mapped KAMF'
instead of using the {NH, NCC} pair received from the MME. The uplink NAS
COUNT value for the initial KgNB derivation is set to 232-1. The reason for
choosing such a value is to avoid any possibility that the value may be
used to derive the same KgNB again.

    The target AMF shall create a NAS Container to signal the necessary
    security parameters to the UE. The NAS Container shall include a NAS
    MAC, the selected 5G NAS security algorithms, the ngKSI associated with
    the derived KAMF' and the NCC value associated with the NH parameter
    used in the derivation of the KAMF'.  The target AMF shall calculate
    the NAS MAC as described in clause 6.9.2.3.3. with the COUNT parameter
    set to the maximal value of 232-1.

    The target AMF shall increment the downlink NAS COUNT by one after
    creating a NAS Container.

4. The target AMF requests the target gNB/ng-eNB to establish the bearer(s)
by sending the Handover Request message.

    The target AMF sends the NAS Container created in step 3 along with,
    the {NCC=0, NH=derived temporary KgNB}, the New Security Context
    Indicator (NSCI), and the UE security capabilities in the Handover
    Request message to the target gNB/ng-eNB. The target AMF shall further
    set the NCC to one and shall further compute a NH as specified in Annex
    A.10. The target AMF shall further store the {NCC=1, NH} pair.

5. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall selects the 5G AS security algorithms from
the list in the UE security capabilities

The target gNB/ng-eNB shall compute the KgNB to be used with the UE by
performing the key derivation defined in Annex A.11 with the {NCC, NH} pair
received in the Handover Request message and the target PCI and its
frequency ARFCN-DL. The target gNB/ng-eNB shall associate the NCC value
received from AMF with the KgNB.The target gNB /ng-eNB shall then derive
the 5G AS security context, by deriving the 5G AS keys (KRRCint, KRRCenc,
KUPint, and KUPenc) from the KgNB and the selected 5G AS security algorithm
identifiers as described in Annex A.8 for gNB and in Annex A.7 in TS
33.401[10].

    The target gNB/ng-eNB sends a Handover Request Ack message to the
    target AMF. Included in the Handover Request Ack message is the Target
    to Source Container, which contains the selected 5G AS algorithms, the
    keySetChangeIndicator, the NCC value from the received {NH, NCC} pair,
    and the NAS Container received from the target AMF. If the target
    gNB/ng-eNB had received the NSCI, it shall set the
    keySetChangeIndicator field to true, otherwise it shall set the
    keySetChangeIndicator field to false.

  6. The target AMF sends the Forward Relocation Response message to the
  source MME. The required security parameters obtained from gNB/ng-eNB in
  step 5 as the Target to Source Container are forwarded to the source MME.

7. The source MME sends the Handover Command to the source eNB. The source
eNB commands the UE to handover to the target 5G network by sending the
Handover Command. This message includes all the security related parameters
in the NAS Container obtained from the target AMF in step 6.

8. The UE derives a mapped KAMF' key from the KASME in the same way the AMF
did in step 3. It shall also derive the 5G NAS keys and KgNB corresponding
to the AMF and the target gNB/ng-eNB in step 3 and step 5. The UE shall
further set the selected EPS NAS security algorithms in the 5G security
context to the NAS security algorithms used with the source MME. It
associates this mapped 5G security context with the ngKSI included in the
NAS Container. The UE shall verify the NAS MAC in the NAS Container.

If verification of the NAS MAC fails, the UE shall abort the handover
procedure. Furthermore, the UE shall discard the new NAS security context
if it was derived and continue to use the existing NAS and AS security
contexts.

NOTE 4:  Void.

The mapped 5G security context shall become the current 5G security
context.

9. The UE sends the Handover Complete message to the target gNB/ng-eNB.
This shall be ciphered and integrity protected by the AS keys in the
current 5G security context.

10.  The target gNB/ng-eNB notifies the target AMF with a Handover Notify
message.

If the UE has a native 5G security context established during the previous
visit to 5GS, then the UE shall provide the associated the 5G GUTI as an
additional GUTI in the Registration Request following the handover
procedure. The UE shall use the mapped 5G security context to protect the
subsequent Registration Request message over 3GPP access. The target AMF
shall validate the integrity of the Registration Request message using the
mapped security context. Upon successful validation, the target AMF shall
send a context request message to the old AMF and shall include the
additional GUTI and an indication that the UE is validated. Upon receiving
the context request message with the indication that the UE is validated,
the old AMF shall skip the integrity check and transfer the native 5G
security context to the target AMF.The AMF shall retrieve the native
security context using the 5G GUTI. If the AMF determines to activate the
native security context, the AMF shall perform a NAS SMC procedure.

NOTE 5: It is up to AMF when to activate the native 5G security context.

If the handover is not completed successfully, the new mapped 5G security
context cannot be used in the future. In this case, the AMF shall delete
the new mapped 5G security context.

If the AMF has no native 5G security context available when the UE performs
the Registration Request (protected by the mapped 5G security context)
following the handover procedure, then the AMF via the SEAF should run a
primary authentication depending on local operator policy.

The handling of security contexts in the case of multiple active NAS
connections in the same PLMNs serving network is given in clasue 6.4.2.2.


8.5  Idle mode mobility from 5GS to EPS over N26


8.5.1  General

This clause covers the case of idle mode mobility from 5GS to EPS over N26,
as defined in TS 23.502 [8].The UE performs either Tracking Area Update
(TAU) procedure or Initial Attach procedure in this scenario.


8.5.2  TAU Procedure

NOTE:  This procedure is based on clause 4.11.1.3.2 in TS 23.502 [8] and
only includes steps and descriptions that are relevant to security.

[pic]

Figure 8.5.2-1: Idle mode mobility from 5G to 4G

1. The UE initiates the TAU procedure by sending a TAU Request to the MME
with a mapped EPS GUTI derived from the 5G GUTI and its EPS security
capabilities. The mapped EPS GUTI contains the information of the AMF that
has the latest UE context in the 5G network.

The UE integrity protects the TAU Request message using the current 5G NAS
security context identified by the 5G GUTI used to derive the mapped EPS
GUTI. More precisely, the UE shall compute the NAS MAC for the TAU request
as it is done for a 5G NAS message over a 3GPP access. The NAS Uplink COUNT
for integrity protection of the TAU request shall use the same value as the
5G NAS Uplink COUNT. Consequently, this results in an increase of the
stored NAS Uplink COUNT value in the NAS COUNT pair associated with the
3GPP access. The corresponding ngKSI value of the 5G Security context is
included in the eKSI parameter of the TAU Request message.

2. Upon receipt of the TAU Request, the MME obtains the AMF address from
the mapped EPS GUTI value.

3. The MME forwards the complete TAU Request message including the eKSI,
NAS-MAC and mapped EPS GUTI in the Context Request message.

4. The AMF shall use the eKSI value field to identify the 5G NAS security
context and use it to verify the TAU Request message as if it was a 5G NAS
message received over 3GPP access.

5. If the verification is successful, the AMF shall derive a mapped EPS NAS
security context as described in clause 8.6.1. The AMF shall set the EPS
NAS algorithms to the ones indicated earlier to the UE in a NAS SMC as
described in clause 6.7.2.

The AMF shall include the mapped EPS NAS security context in the Context
Response message it sends to the MME. The AMF shall never transfer 5G
security parameters to an entity outside the 5G system.

6. The UE shall derive a mapped EPS NAS security context as described in
clause 8.6.1. The UE shall select the EPS algorithms using the ones
received in an earlier NAS SMC from the AMF as described in clause 6.7.2.
The UE shall immediately activate the mapped EPS security context and be
ready to use it for the processing of the TAU Accept message in step 7.

7. The MME compares the UE security algorithms to its configured list after
it receives the Context Response message. If an algorithm change is
required, the MME shall select the NAS algorithm which has the highest
priority from its configured list and is also present in the UE 5G security
capabilities and initiate an NAS SMC to the UE. Otherwise, step 8~10 shall
be skipped.

8 - 10.  The MME and the UE performs an NAS SMC to derive new NAS keys with
the new algorithms as described in Clause 7.2.8.1.2 of TS 33.401[10].

11.  The MME completes the procedure with a TAU Accept message.

After successful completion of the TAU procedure, the UE shall delete any
mapped 5G security context. After deleting the mapped 5G security context,
if the UE has a full non-current native 5G NAS security context then the UE
shall make the non-current native 5G NAS security context the current one.


8.5.3  Initial Attach Procedure

NOTE:  This procedure is based on clause 4.11.1.5.2 in TS 23.502 [8].

The Initial Attach procedure shall use the security mechanism for the TAU
procedure in clause 8.5.2.


8.6  Mapping of security contexts


8.6.1  Mapping of a 5G security context to an EPS security context

The derivation of a mapped EPS security context from a 5G security context
is done as described below:

-  The KASME' key, taken as the KASME, shall be derived from the KAMF using
the 5G NAS Uplink COUNT value derived from the TAU Request message or
Attach Request message in idle mode mobility or the 5G NAS Downlink COUNT
value in handovers as described in Annex A.14.

-  The eKSI for the newly derived KASME key shall be defined such as the
value field is taken from the ngKSI and the type field is set to indicate a
mapped security context.

-  The EPS uplink and downlink NAS COUNT values in the mapped context shall
be set to the uplink and downlink NAS COUNT values of the current 5G
security context respectively.

-  The selected EPS NAS algorithms shall be set to the EPS algorithms
signalled to the UE by the AMF during an early authentication procedure
followed by a NAS SMC as described in clause 6.7.2.

NOTE:  Whenever an algorithm change is required, the target MME initiates
an NAS SMC to select other algorithms as described in TS 33.401 [10].


8.6.2  Mapping of an EPS security context to a 5G security context

The derivation of a mapped 5G security context from an EPS security is done
as described below.

-  The KAMF' key, taken as the KAMF, shall be derived from the KASME using
the EPS NAS Uplink COUNT of the TAU message included in the Registration
Request message in idle mode mobility or the NH value in handovers as
described in clause A.15.

-  The ngKSI for the newly derived KAMF key shall be defined such as the
value field is taken from the eKSI and the type field is set to indicate a
mapped security context.

-  The 5G NAS COUNT values in the mapped 5G security context shall be set
to 0.

NOTE:  The selection of the 5G NAS algorithms is performed by the AMF and
signalled to the UE either in the NAS Container during handovers as
described in clause 8.4, or in a NAS SMC during idle mode mobility as
described in clause 8.2.


8.7  Interworking without N26 interface in single-registration mode

When the UE supports single-registration mode and network supports
interworking procedure without N26 interface:

-  For mobility from 5GC to EPC, if the UE has a current EPS NAS security
context, the UE shall start using the EPS security context as defined in TS
33.401 [10].

-  For mobility from EPC to 5GC, if the UE has a current 5G NAS security
context, the UE shall start using the 5G NAS security context as defined in
the present document.


9  Security procedures for non-service based interfaces


9.1  General


9.1.1  Use of NDS/IP

The protection of IP based interfaces for 5GC and 5G-AN according to NDS/IP
is specified in TS33.210[3]. Traffic on interfaces carrying control plane
signalling can be both integrity and confidentiality protected according to
NDS/IP.

NOTE 1:  Void.


9.1.2  Implementation requirements

IPsec ESP implementation shall be done according to RFC4303[4] as
profiled by TS33.210[3]. For IPsec implementation, tunnel mode is
mandatory to support while transport mode is optional.

IKEv2 certificate-based authentication implementation shall be done
according to TS33.310[5]. The certificates shall be supported according
to the profile described by TS33.310[5]. IKEv2 shall be supported
conforming to the IKEv2 profile described in TS33.310[5].


9.1.3  QoS considerations

If the sender of IPsec traffic uses DiffServ Code Points (DSCPs) to
distinguish different QoS classes, either by copying DSCP from the inner IP
header or directly setting the encapsulating IP header's DSCP, the
resulting traffic may be reordered to the point where the receiving node's
anti-replay check discards the packet. If different DSCPs are used on the
encapsulating IP header, then to avoid packet discard under one IKE SA and
with the same set of traffic selectors, distinct Child-SAs should be
established for each of the traffic classes (using the DSCPs as
classifiers) as specified in RFC4301[6].


9.2  Security mechanisms for the N2 interface

N2 is the reference point between the AMF and the 5G-AN. It is used, among
other things, to carry NAS signalling traffic between the UE and the AMF
over 3GPP and non-3GPP accesses.

The transport of control plane data over N2 shall be integrity,
confidentiality and replay-protected.

In order to protect the N2 reference point, it is required to implement
IPsec ESP and IKEv2 certificates-based authentication as specified in sub-
clause 9.1.2 of the present document. IPsec is mandatory to implement on
the gNB and the ng-eNB. On the core network side, a SEG may be used to
terminate the IPsec tunnel.

In addition to IPsec, DTLS shall be supported as specified in RFC6083[58]
to provide mutual authentication, integrity protection, replay protection
and confidentiality protection. Security profiles for DTLS implementation
and usage shall follow the TLS profile given in clause 6.2 of TS 33.210 [3]
and the certificate profile given in clause 6.1.3a of TS 33.310 [5]. The
identities in the end entity certificates shall be used for authentication
and policy checks.

Mutual authentication shall be supported over the N2 interface between the
AMF and the 5G-AN using DTLS and/or IKEv2.

NOTE 1:  The use of transport layer security, via DTLS, does not rule out
the use of network layer protection according to NDS/IP as specified in TS
33.210 [3]. In fact, IPsec has the advantage of providing topology hiding.

NOTE 2:  The use of cryptographic solutions to protect N2 is an operator's
decision. In case the NG-RAN node (gNB or ng-eNB) has been placed in a
physically secured environment then the 'secure environment' includes other
nodes and links beside the NG-RAN node.


9.3  Security requirements and procedures on N3

N3 is the reference point between the 5G-AN and UPF. It is used to carry
user plane data from the UE to the UPF.

The transport of user data over N3 shall be integrity, confidentiality and
replay-protected.

In order to protect the traffic on the N3 reference point, it is required
to implement IPsec ESP and IKEv2 certificate-based authentication as
specified in sub-clause 9.1.2 of the present document with confidentiality,
integrity and replay protection. IPsec is mandatory to implement on the gNB
and the ng-eNB. On the core network side, a SEG may be used to terminate
the IPsec tunnel.

NOTE:  The use of cryptographic solutions to protect N3 is an operator's
decision. In case the NG-RAN node (gNB or ng-eNB) has been placed in a
physically secured environment then the 'secure environment' includes other
nodes and links beside the NG-RAN node.

QoS related aspects are further described in sub-clause 9.1.3 of the
present document.


9.4  Security mechanisms for the Xn interface

Xn is the interface connecting NG-RAN nodes. It consists of Xn-C and Xn-U.
Xn-C is used to carry signalling and Xn-U user plane data.

The transport of control plane data and user data over Xn shall be
integrity, confidentiality and replay-protected.

In order to protect the traffic on the Xn reference point, it is required
to implement IPsec ESP and IKEv2 certificate- based authentication as
specified in sub-clause 9.1.2 of the present document with confidentiality,
integrity and replay protection. IPsec shall be supported on the gNB and ng-
eNB.

In addition to IPsec, for the Xn-C interface, DTLS shall be supported as
specified in RFC6083[58] to provide mutual authentication, integrity
protection, replay protection and confidentiality protection. Security
profiles for DTLS implementation and usage shall follow the TLS profile
given in clause 6.2 of TS 33.210 [3] and the certificate profile given in
clause 6.1.3a of TS 33.310 [5]. The identities in the end entity
certificates shall be used for authentication and policy checks.

Mutual authentication shall be supported over the Xn interface between the
NG-RAN nodes using DTLS and/or IKEv2.

NOTE 1:  The use of transport layer security, via DTLS, does not rule out
the use of network layer protection according to NDS/IP as specified in TS
33.210 [3]. In fact, IPsec has the advantage of providing topology hiding..

NOTE 2:  The use of cryptographic solutions to protect Xn is an operator's
decision. In case the NG-RAN node (gNB or ng-eNB) has been placed in a
physically secured environment then the 'secure environment' includes other
nodes and links beside the NG-RAN node.

QoS related aspects are further described in sub-clause 9.1.3 of the
present document.


9.5  Interfaces based on DIAMETER or GTP

This clause applies to all DIAMETER or GTP-based interfaces between the 5G
Core and other network entities that are not part of the 5G System. These
includes the Rx interface between the PCF and the IMS System and the N26
interface between the AMF and the MME.

The protection of these interfaces shall be supported according to NDS/IP
as specified in TS 33.210 [3], unless security is provided by other means,
e.g. physical security. If (D)TLS is used, implementation and usage shall
follow the profile given in clause 6.2 of TS 33.210 [3] and clause 6.1.3a
of TS 33.310 [5]. The cipher suites in RFC 6733 shall not be supported. A
SEG may be used to terminate the NDS/IP IPsec tunnels.


9.5.1  Void


9.6  Void


9.7  Void


9.8  Security mechanisms for protection of the gNB internal interfaces


9.8.1  General

The following clause applies to the gNB supporting the split architecture.


9.8.2  Security mechanisms for the F1 interface

The F1 interface connects the gNB-CU to the gNB-DU. It consists of the F1-C
for control plane and the F1-U for the user plane. The security mechanisms
for the F1 interface connecting the IAB-node to the IAB-donor-CU are
detailed in clause M.3.3 of this document.

In order to protect the traffic on the F1-U interface, IPsec ESP and IKEv2
certificates-based authentication shall be supported as specified in sub-
clause 9.1.2 of the present document with confidentiality, integrity and
replay protection.

In order to protect the traffic on the F1-C interface, IPsec ESP and IKEv2
certificates-based authentication shall be supported as specified in sub-
clause 9.1.2 of the present document with confidentiality, integrity and
replay protection.

IPsec is mandatory to implement on the gNB-DU and on the gNB-CU. On the gNB-
CU side, a SEG may be used to terminate the IPsec tunnel.

In addition to IPsec, for the F1-C interface, DTLS shall be supported as
specified in RFC6083[58] to provide mutual authentication, integrity
protection, replay protection and confidentiality protection. Security
profiles for DTLS implementation and usage shall follow the TLS profile
given in clause 6.2 of TS 33.210 [3] and the certificate profile given in
clause 6.1.3a of TS 33.310 [5]. The identities in the end entity
certificates shall be used for authentication and policy checks..

Mutual authentication shall be supported over the F1-C interface between
the gNB-CU and the gNB-DU using DTLS and/or IKEv2.

NOTE 1:  The use of transport layer security, via DTLS, does not rule out
the use of network layer protection according to NDS/IP as specified in TS
33.210 [3]. In fact, IPsec has the advantage of providing topology hiding.

NOTE 2:  The use of cryptographic solutions to protect F1 is an operator's
decision. In case the gNB or the IAB-node has been placed in a physically
secured environment then the 'secure environment' includes other nodes and
links beside the gNB or the IAB-node.

NOTE 3:  The security considerations for DTLS over SCTP are documented in
RFC6083 [58].

NOTE 4:  The support of DTLS (with mutual authentication) for F1-C, between
the IAB-node (gNB-DU) and the IAB-donor-CU, is optional for the IAB-node
and the IAB-donor-CU.


9.8.3  Security mechanisms for the E1 interface

The E1 interface connects the gNB-CU-CP to the gNB-CU-UP. It is only used
for the transport of signalling data.

In order to protect the traffic on the E1 interface, IPsec ESP and IKEv2
certificates-based authentication shall be supported as specified in sub-
clause 9.1.2 of the present document with confidentiality, integrity and
replay protection.

In addition to IPsec, DTLS shall be supported as specified in RFC6083[58]
to provide mutual authentication, integrity protection, replay protection
and confidentiality protection. Security profiles for DTLS implementation
and usage shall follow the TLS profile given in clause 6.2 of TS 33.210 [3]
and the certificate profile given in clause 6.1.3a of TS 33.310 [5]. The
identities in the end entity certificates shall be used for authentication
and policy checks.

Mutual authentication shall be supported over the E1interface between the
gNB-CU-CP and the gNB-CU-UP using DTLS and/or IKEv2.

IPsec is mandatory to support on the gNB-CU-UP and the gNB-CU-CP. Observe
that on both the gNB-CU-CP and the gNB-CU-UP sides, a SEG may be used to
terminate the IPsec tunnel.

NOTE 1:  The use of transport layer security, via DTLS, does not rule out
the use of network layer protection according to NDS/IP as specified in TS
33.210 [3]. In fact, IPsec has the advantage of providing topology hiding.

NOTE 2:  The use of cryptographic solutions to protect E1 is an operator's
decision. In case the gNB has been placed in a physically secured
environment then the 'secure environment' includes other nodes and links
beside the gNB.


9.9  Security mechanisms for non-SBA interfaces internal to the 5GC and
         between PLMNs

Non-SBA interfaces internal to the 5G Core such as N4 and N9 can be used to
transport signalling data as well as privacy sensitive material, such as
user and subscription data, or other parameters, such as security keys.
Therefore, these interfaces shall be confidentiality, integrity, and replay
protected.

Roaming interfaces between PLMNs except for N32, shall be confidentiality,
integrity, and replay protected. Protection for the N32 interface is
specified in clauses 13.1 and 13.2..

For the protection of the above mentioned internal and roaming interfaces
except N32, NDS/IP shall be used as specified in [3], unless security is
provided by other means, e.g. physical security. A SEG may be used to
terminate the NDS/IP IPsec tunnels.


9.10 Security mechanisms for the interface between W-5GAN and 5GC

The W-AGF function in Wireline 5G Access network (W-5GAN) terminates the
following interfaces:

- N2 interface between the W-5GAN and the AMF.

-N3 interface between the W-5GAN and the UPF.

The security of the N2 interface between the W-5GAN and the AMF is as
defined in clause 9.2 of the present document.

The security of the N3 interface between the W-5GAN and the UPF is as
defined in clause 9.3 of the present document.

On the W-AGF side a SEG may be used to terminate the IPsec tunnels.

NOTE:  Clauses 9.2 and 9.3 require that the N2 and N3 interfaces are
integrity, confidentiality, and replay protected. The same protection can
be achieved by placing the AGF in the same trust domain as the AMF and the
SMF.


10 Security aspects of IMS emergency session handling


10.1 General

This clause addresses security procedures for IMS emergency session
handling.


10.2 Security procedures and their applicability


10.2.1 Authenticated IMS Emergency Sessions


10.2.1.1 General

Authenticated emergency services are provided to UEs in the following
scenarios:

a) A UE in RM-DEREGISTERED state requests IMS Emergency services

In this scenario, the UE has a valid subscription and is authenticated when
it registers with the network.

b) A UE in RM-REGISTERED state initiates a PDU Session request to setup an
IMS Emergency Session

In this scenario, the UE is already registered with the network and share a
security context with the AMF. The UE initiates a session management
message to setup a new bearer for emergency services. The request for
emergency services is sent protected by the current security context. The
AMF may decide to re-authenticate the UE.

If there is a redirection of the UE to EUTRAN for IMS Emergency services,
the redirect command from the gNB to the UE shall be protected by the UEs
AS security context. The AMF shall send the NG AP UE Initial Context
setup message to enable the AS security context set up.


10.2.1.2 UE in RM-DEREGISTERED state requests a PDU Session for IMS
         Emergency services

The UE shall first initiate a normal initial registration procedure to
register with the 5G network. Upon successful normal registration, the UE
initiates the UE requested PDU session establishment procedure to establish
a PDU Session to receive emergency services as specified in TS 23.502 [8].

At the time of registration, the security mode control procedure shall be
applied to authenticate the UE and setup NAS and AS security. Thus,
integrity protection (and optionally ciphering) shall be applied to the
emergency bearers as for normal bearers.

If authentication fails for any reason, it shall be treated the same way as
any registration. Once the IMS Emergency Session is in progress with NAS
and AS integrity protection (and optionally ciphering) applied, failure of
integrity checking or ciphering (for both NAS and AS) is an unusual
circumstance and shall be treated as in the case of a normal bearer.


10.2.1.3 UE in RM-REGISTERED state requests a PDU Session for IMS Emergency
         services

The UE initiates the UE requested PDU session establishment procedure to
receive emergency services as specified in clause 5.16.4 in TS 23.501 [2].
Since the UE already has a current 5G security context when it attempts to
set up an IMS Emergency Session, the UE shall use this 5G security context
to protect NAS, RRC and UP traffic. If the AMF successfully validates the
PDU Session request for emergency bearer services using the current 5G
security context, the AMF may accept this request and setup a PDU session.

If the AMF attempts to re-authenticate the UE after receiving a correctly
integrity protected request for emergency bearer services based on the
current NAS security context and the authentication failed and if the
serving network policy does not allow unauthenticated IMS Emergency
Sessions, the UE and AMF shall proceed as for the initial registration
error scenario as described in clause 6.1.3.

If the AMF attempts to re-authenticate the UE after receiving a correctly
integrity protected request for emergency bearer services based on the
current NAS security context and the authentication failed and the serving
network policy allows unauthenticated IMS Emergency Sessions, then the set
up of the emergency bearers shall proceed in one of the two ways:

a) The set-up proceeds according to clause 10.2.2. In this case, there is
no need for the UE to re-attach, and the AMF requests the use of the NULL
ciphering and integrity algorithms in the same way as described in clause
10.2.2.2 for the case of Emergency registration by UEs in limited service
state.

NOTE 1:  If the authentication failure is detected in the AMF then the UE
is not aware of the failure in the AMF, but still needs to be prepared,
according to the conditions specified in TS 24.301, to accept a NAS SMC
from the AMF requesting the use of the NULL ciphering and integrity
algorithms.

NOTE 2:  Regardless of if the authentication failed in the UE or in the
AMF, the AMF can assume that the UE will accept that NULL integrity and
ciphering algorithms are selected in the security mode control procedure

b) The UE and the AMF continues using the current security context as
described below for the case when primary authentication is executed while
setting up a PDU session for emergency services.

If primary authentication procedure is executed while setting up a PDU
Session for emergency bearer services, the AMF and UE shall behave as
follows:

UE behavior:

-  Upon successful authentication verification in the UE, the UE shall
continue using the current security context.

-  Alternatively, upon authentication verification failure in the UE, the
UE shall send a failure message to the AMF and shall continue using the
current security context. If the UE receives a NAS security mode command
selecting NULL integrity and ciphering algorithms, the UE shall accept this
as long as the IMS Emergency session progresses.

AMF behavior:

-  If the serving network policy allows unauthenticated IMS Emergency
Sessions, the AMF, after the unsuccessful authentication verification of
the UE, should not send a reject an Authentication Reject message and
continue using the current security context with the UE.

-  After receiving both, the EC Indication and the failure message from the
UE, the AMF shall continue using the current security context with the UE
for establishing an emergency bearer.


10.2.2 Unauthenticated IMS Emergency Sessions


10.2.2.1 General

There are many scenarios when an unauthenticated Emergency Session may be
established without the network having to authenticate the UE or apply
ciphering or integrity protection for either AS or NAS. For example:

a) UEs that are in Limited service state UEs, as specified in clause 3.5 in
TS 23.122

b) UEs that have valid subscription but SN cannot complete authentication
because of network failure or other reasons

TS 23.401 clause 4.3.12.1 identifies four possible network behaviours of
emergency bearer support. Amongst these, the following two cases are
applicable for unauthenticated emergency sessions:

a. IMSI required, authentication optional. These UEs shall have a SUPI. If
authentication fails, the UE is granted access and the unauthenticated SUPI
retained in the network for recording purposes. The PEI is used in the
network as the UE identifier. PEI only UEs will be rejected (e.g. UICCless
UEs).

b. All UEs are allowed. Along with authenticated UEs, this includes UEs
with a SUPI that cannot be authenticated and UEs with only an PEI. If an
unauthenticated SUPI is provided by the UE, the unauthenticated SUPI is
retained in the network for recording purposes. The PEI is used in the
network to identify the UE.

The network policy is configured to one of the above, and accordingly
determine how emergency requests from the UE are treated.

If the ME receives a NAS SMC selecting NIA0 (NULL integrity) for integrity
protection, and NEA0 (NULL ciphering) for encryption protection, then:

-  the ME shall mark any stored native 5G NAS security context on the USIM
/non-volatile ME memory as invalid; and

-  the ME shall not update the USIM/non-volatile ME memory with the current
5G NAS security context.

These two rules override all other rules regarding updating the 5G NAS
security context on the USIM/non-volatile ME memory, in the present
document.

If NIA0 is used, and the NAS COUNT values wrap around, and a new KAMF has
not been established before the NAS COUNT wrap around, the NAS connection
shall be kept.

NOTE:  For unauthenticated IMS emergency sessions, NIA0, i.e., null
integrity algorithm, is used for integrity protection. Additionally, as the
NAS COUNT values can wrap around, the initialization of the NAS COUNT
values are not crucial. Uplink and downlink NAS COUNT are incremented for
NAS message that use NIA0, as for any other NAS messages.

A UE without a valid 5G subscription shall at an IRAT handover to 5G, when
an IMS Emergency Service is active, be considered by the AMF to be
unauthenticated. In such a scenario, EIA0 shall be used in 5G after
handover if the target network policy allows unauthenticated IMS Emergency
Sessions.

A handover from 5G to another RAT, of an unauthenticated IMS Emergency
Session, shall result in an unauthenticated IMS Emergency Session in the
other RAT.


10.2.2.2 UE sets up an IMS Emergency session with emergency registration

UEs that are in limited service state (LSM) request emergency services by
initiating the Registration procedure with the indication that the
registration is to receive emergency services, referred to as Emergency
Registration.

UEs that had earlier registered for normal services but now cannot be
authenticated by the serving network, shall initiate Emergency Registration
procedure to request emergency services.

It shall be possible to configure whether the network allows or rejects an
emergency registration request and whether it allows unauthenticated UEs to
establish bearers for unauthenticated IMS emergency sessions or not.

The AMF may attempt to authenticate the UE after receiving the emergency
registration request.

If authentication failed in the UE during an emergency registration
request, the UE shall wait for a NAS SMC command to set up an
unauthenticated emergency bearer.

If authentication failed in the serving network and if the serving network
policy does not allow unauthenticated IMS Emergency Sessions, the UE and
AMF shall proceed as with the normal initial registration requests. The AMF
shall reject the unauthenticated emergency bearer setup request from the
UE.

If authentication failed in the serving network and if the serving network
policy allow unauthenticated IMS Emergency Sessions, then the AMF shall
support unauthenticated emergency bearer setup and the behaviours of the UE
and the AMF are as described below.

a) UE behaviour:

After sending Emergency Registration request to the serving network the UE
shall know of its own intent to establish an unauthenticated IMS Emergency
Session.

The UE shall proceed as specified for the non-emergency case in except that
the UE shall accept a NAS SMC selecting NEA0 and NIA0 algorithms from the
AMF. If the UE accepts a NAS SMC selecting NEA0 and NIA0 algorithms from
the AMF as part of Emergency Registration request, then the primary
authentication performed if any shall be considered as unsuccessful and the
newly generated KAUSF is not stored.

NOTE:  In case of authentication success the AMF will send a NAS SMC
selecting algorithms with a non-NULL integrity algorithm, and the UE will
accept it.

b) AMF behavior:

After receiving Emergency Registration request from the UE, the AMF knows
of that UE's intent to establish an unauthenticated IMS Emergency Session.

-  If the AMF cannot identify the subscriber, or cannot obtain
authentication vector (when SUPI is provided), the AMF shall send NAS SMC
with NULL algorithms to the UE regardless of the supported algorithms
announced previously by the UE.

-  After the unsuccessful verification of the UE, the AMF shall send NAS
SMC with NULL algorithms to the UE regardless of the supported algorithms
announced previously by the UE.

-  If both, the Emergency Registration request and an AUTHENTICATION
FAILURE  message with error code as defined in 24.501 [35] clauses
5.4.1.2.4.5 (for EAP based authentication) or 5.4.1.3.7 (for 5G AKA based
authentication) are received by the AMF from the UE, then the AMF shall
send NAS SMC with NULL algorithms to the UE regardless of the supported
algorithms announced previously by the UE.

If the UE has initiated a PDU session establishment procedure to establish
bearers for unauthenticated IMS emergency sessions and the AMF has
indicated to the SMF that this is an unauthenticated emergency call, then
the SMF shall indicate 'Not Needed' in the UP security policy for both UP
confidentiality and UP integrity protection to the ng-eNB/gNB.


10.2.2.3 Key generation for Unauthenticated IMS Emergency Sessions


10.2.2.3.1  General

An unauthenticated UE does not share a complete 5G NAS security context
with the network as there has been no successful primary authentication run
between the UE and the AMF. When the UE and the AMF does not share the
security context the only possibility for an AMF that allows
unauthenticated IMS Emergency Sessions is to run with the NULL integrity
algorithm NIA0 and the NULL ciphering algorithm NEA0.

When there has been no successful run of Primary authentication of the UE,
the UE and the AMF independently generate the KAMF in an implementation
defined way and populate the 5G NAS security context with this KAMF to be
used when activating a 5G NAS security context. All key derivations proceed
as if they were based on a KAMF generated from a successful Primary
authentication run.

Even if no confidentiality or integrity protection is provided by NIA0 and
NEA0, the UE and the network treat the 5G security context with the
independently generated KAMF as if it contained a normally generated KAMF.


10.2.2.3.2  Handover

When UE attempts to make Xn/N2 handover, UE and gNB derive and transfer the
keys as normal to re-use the normal handover mechanism. Since the derived
keys have no ability to affect the output of the NULL algorithms it is
irrelevant that the network and the UE derive different keys. This implies
that source gNB will forward UE 5G security capability which contains NIA0
and NEA0 only to target gNB. So the target gNB can only select NIA0 for
integrity protection and NEA0 for confidential protection. If the UE does
not receive any selection of new AS security algorithms during a intra-gNB-
CU handover, the UE continues to use the same algorithms as before the
handover (see TS 38.331 [22]).


11 Security procedures between UE and external data networks via the 5G
         Network


11.1 EAP based secondary authentication by an external DN-AAA server


11.1.1 General

This sub-clause specifies support for optional to use secondary
authentication between the UE and an external data network (DN).

The EAP framework specified in RFC 3748 [27] shall be used for
authentication between the UE and a DN-AAA server in the external data
network. The SMF shall perform the role of the EAP Authenticator. In the
non-roaming scenario, the SMF shall perform the role of EAP Authenticator.
And In the local break out scenario, the V-SMF of visited nework shall
perform the role of EAP Authenticator. In the Home Routed deployment
scenario, the H-SMF shall perform the role of the EAP Authenticator and the
V-SMF shall transport the EAP messages exchanged between the UE and H-SMF.
It shall rely on the external DN-AAA server to authenticate and authorize
the UE's request for the establishment of PDU sessions.

Between the UE and the SMF, EAP messages shall be sent in the SM NAS
message. This message is received at the AMF over N1 and delivered to the
SMF over N11 using either the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext service
operation or the Nsmf_PDUSession_Update SM Context service operation, as
specified in TS23.502 [8]. The SMF that takes the role of the EAP
authenticator communicates with the external DN-AAA over N4 and N6 via the
UPF.

The SMF invokes the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer service
operation to transfer the N1 NAS message containing the EAP message,
towards the UE via the AMF.

Following clauses describe the procedures for initial Authentication and Re-
Authentication with the external DN-AAA server.


11.1.2 Authentication

[pic]

Figure 11.1.2-1: Initial EAP Authentication with an external AAA server

This procedure concerns both roaming and non-roaming scenarios. In the non-
roaming case, the V-SMF is not involved. In the HR roaming case, the V-SMF
shall proxy the signalling between the AMF in the VPLMN and the H-SMF in
the HPLMN. In the LBO roaming case, only one SMF in VPLMN is involved.

The following procedure is based on sub-clauses 4.2.2.2.2, 4.3.2.2.1 and
4.3.2.3 in TS 23.502 [8].

NOTE 1:  Steps 1-6 are borrowed from clause 4.2.2.2.2 and 4.3.2.2.1 TS
23.502 [8] and are for information only. Steps 7 to 15are related to
authentication and are normative text.

1-3. The NG-UE registers with the network performing primary authentication
with the AUSF/ARPF based on its network access credentials and establishes
a NAS security context with the AMF.

4. The UE initiates establishment of a new PDU Session by sending a NAS
message containing a PDU Session Establishment Request within the N1 SM
container, slice information (identified by S-NSSAI) , PDU session ID and
the PDN it would like to connect to (identified by DNN).

   The PDU Session Establishment Request may contain SM PDU DN Request
Container IE containing information for the PDU session authorization by
the external DN.

5a. The AMF selects a V-SMF and sends either
Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request or Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext
Request with the N1 SM container as one of its payload. It also forwards
SUPI PDU Session ID, the received S-NSSAI, and the DNN.

5b. The V-SMF sends an Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Responseor
Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext Response correspondingly to the AMF.

In case of a single SMF being involved in the PDU session setup, e.g. non-
roaming or local breakout, that single SMF takes the role of both V-SMF and
H-SMF. In this case, steps 6 and 17 are skipped.

6. The V-SMF sends an Nsmf_PDUSession_Create Request to the H-SMF.

7. The H-SMF obtains subscription data from the UDM for the given SUPI
obtained from the AMF in step 5. The SMF checks the subscription data
whether the secondary authentication is required and whether the UE request
is allowed according to the user subscription and local policies. If not
allowed, the H-SMF will reject UE's request via SM-NAS signalling and skip
rest of the procedure. If secondary authentication is required, the SMF may
also check whether the UE has been authenticated and/or authorized by the
same DN, as indicated DNN in step 5, or the same AAA server in a previous
PDU session establishment. The SMF may skip steps 8 to 15 if positive.

Note 2:  The information on a successful authentication/authorization
between a UE and an SMF may be saved in SMF and/or UDM.

8. The H-SMF shall trigger EAP Authentication to obtain authorization from
an external DN-AAA server. If there is no existing N4 session, the H-SMF
selects a UPF and establishes an N4 Session with it. The H-SMF notifies the
DN-AAA server with the GPSI, if available, and the IP address(es) of the UE
allocated to the PDU Session if the PDU session is of IP PDU type or the
MAC address if the PDU session is of Ethernet PDU type.

9. The H-SMF may send an EAP Request/Identity message to the UE.

10. The UE may send an EAP Response/Identity message contained within t a
NAS message. The DN-specific identity shall comply with Network Access
Identifier (NAI) format.

  To avoid the additional round-trip in steps 9 and 10, the secondary
    authentication DN-specific identity may be sent by the UE in step 4. In
    this case, H-SMF forms an EAP Response/Identity message that contains
    the identity.

11. If there is no existing N4 session, the H-SMF selects a UPF and
establishes an N4 Session with it.

12. The DN-specific identity, if provided by the UE, is forwarded to the
UPF. The H-SMF identifies the DN AAA server based on the DN-specific
identity provided by the UE and on local configuration.

The UPF shall forward the DN-specific identity within an EAP
Response/Identity message to the DN AAA Server.

13. The DN AAA server and the UE shall exchange EAP messages, as required
by the EAP method. In addition, it may send additional authorization
information as defined in TS 23.501 clause 5.6.6.

14. After the successful completion of the authentication procedure, DN AAA
server shall send EAP Success message to the H-SMF.

15. This completes the authentication procedure at the SMF. The SMF may
save the DN-specific ID and DNN (or DN's AAA server ID if available) in a
list for successful authentication/authorization between UE and an SMF.
Alternatively, the SMF may update the list in UDM.

If the authorization is successful, PDU Session Establishment proceeds
further starting at step 7a of Figure 4.3.2.2.1-1 in TS 23.502 [8].

16a-16b. The SMF initiates a N4 Session Modification procedure with the
selected UPF as in steps 10a and 10b of Fig 4.3.2.2.1-1 in TS 23.502 [8].

17. The H-SMF sends an Nsmf_PDUSession_Create Response to the V-SMF. This
message shall include EAP Success to be sent to the UE to V-SMF.

18. The V-SMF sends Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer to the AMF as in
step 11 of Figure 4.3.2.2.1-1 in TS 23.502 [8]. This message shall include
EAP Success to be sent to the UE within the NAS SM PDU Session
Establishment Accept message.

19. The AMF forwards NAS SM PDU Session Establishment Accept message along
with EAP Success to the UE as described in steps 12 and step 13 of Figure
4.3.2.2.1-1 in TS 23.502 [8].

The UE-requested PDU Session Establishment authentication/authorization by
a DN-AAA server proceeds further as described in sub-clause 4.3.2.3 in TS
23.502 [8].


11.1.3 Re-Authentication

[pic]

Figure 11.1.3-1: EAP Re-Authentication with an external AAA server

This procedure concerns both roaming and non-roaming scenarios. In the non-
roaming and LBO roaming cases, only one SMF is involved. In the HR roaming
case, the V-SMF shall proxy the signalling between the AMF in the VPLMN and
the H-SMF in the HPLMN.

1-3  Secondary Authentication has been established according to procedures
specified in clause 11.1.2, Initial EAP Authentication with an external AAA
server.

Secondary Re-authentication may either be initiated by SMF or the external
DN/AAA server. If Re-authentication is initiated by SMF, the procedure
proceeds with step 4 (skipping steps 4a and 4b). If Re-authentication is
initiated by the external DN/AAA server, the procedure proceeds with the
alternative steps 4a and 4b.

4. The SMF decides to initiate Secondary Re-Authentication.

4a. The DN AAA server decides to initiate Secondary Re-Authentication.

4b. The DN AAA shall send a Secondary Re-Authentication request to UPF, and
the UPF forwards it to SMF. The Secondary Re-authentication request
contains the GPSI, if available, and the IP/MAC address of the UE allocated
to the PDU Session and the MAC address if the PDU session is of Ethernet
PDU type.

5. The SMF shall send an EAP Request/Identity message to the UE.

6. The UE shall respond with an EAP Response/Identity message (with Fast-
Reauth Identity).

7. The SMF forwards the EAP Response/Identity to UPF, selected during
initial authentication, over N4 interface.

This establishes an end-to-end connection between the SMF and the external
DN-AAA server for EAP exchange.

8. The UPF shall forward the EAP Response/Identity message to the DN AAA
Server.

9. The DN AAA server and the UE shall exchange EAP messages as required by
the EAP method.

10.  After the completion of the authentication procedure, DN AAA server
either sends EAP Success or EAP Failure message to the SMF.

11.  This completes the Re-authentication procedure at the SMF.

12-13. If the authentication is successful, EAP-Success shall be sent to
UE.

12-14. If authentication is not successful, the SMF notifies failure to
UPF. Upon completion of a N4 Session Modification procedure with the
selected UPF, SMF sends EAP-Failure to UE via AMF.


11.1.4 Secondary authentication and authorization revocation

At any time, a DN-AAA server may revoke the authentication and
authorization for a PDU Session and according to the request from the DN-
AAA server, the SMF may release the PDU Session as specified in sub-clause
4.3.4 of TS 23.502 [8].


12 Security aspects of Network Exposure Function (NEF)


12.1 General

In the 5G system, the Network Functions securely expose capabilities and
events to 3rd party Application Functions via NEF. The NEF also enable
secure provision of information in the 3GPP network by authenticated and
authorized Application Functions.

Requirements on security aspects of NEF are captured in clause 5.9.2.3.


12.2 Mutual authentication

For authentication between NEF and an Application Function that resides
outside the 3GPP operator domain, mutual authentication based on client and
server certificates shall be performed between the NEF and AF using TLS.

Certificate based authentication shall follow the profiles given in 3GPP TS
33.310 [5], clause 6.1.3a. The identities in the end entity certificates
shall be used for authentication and policy checks. The structure of the
PKI used for the certificate is out of scope of the present document.


12.3 Protection of the NEF  AF interface

TLS shall be used to provide integrity protection, replay protection and
confidentiality protection for the interface between the NEF and the
Application Function. The support of TLS is mandatory.

Security profiles for TLS implementation and usage shall follow the
provisions given in clause 6.2 of TS 33.210 [3].


12.4 Authorization of Application Functions requests

After the authentication, NEF determines whether the Application Function
is authorized to send requests for the 3GPP Network Entity. The NEF shall
authorize the requests from Application Function using OAuth-based
authorization mechanism, the specific authorization mechanisms shall follow
the provisions given in RFC 6749 [43].


12.5 Support for CAPIF

When the NEF supports CAPIF for external exposure as specified in clause
6.2.5.1 in TS 23.501[2], then CAPIF core function shall choose the
appropriate CAPIF-2e security method as defined in the sub-clause 6.5.2 in
TS 33.122[53] for mutual authentication and protection of the NEF  AF
interface.


13 Service Based Interfaces (SBI)


13.1 Protection at the network or transport layer


13.1.0 General

All network functions shall support mutually authenticated TLS and HTTPS as
specified in RFC 7540 [47] and RFC 2818 [90]. The identities in the end
entity certificates shall be used for authentication and policy checks.
Network functions shall support both server-side and client-side
certificates. TLS client and server certificates shall be compliant with
the SBA certificate profile specified in clause 6.1.3c of TS 33.310 [5].

The TLS profile shall follow the profile given in  clause 6.2 of TS 33.210
[3] with the restriction that it shall be compliant with the profile given
by HTTP/2 as defined in RFC 7540 [47].

TLS shall be used for transport protection within a PLMN unless network
security is provided by other means.

NOTE 1:  Regardless of whether TLS is used or not, NDS/IP as specified in
TS 33.210 [3] and TS 33.310 [5] can be used for network layer protection.

NOTE 2:  If interfaces are trusted (e.g. physically protected), it is for
the PLMN-operator to decide whether to use cryptographic protection.


13.1.1 TLS protection between NF and SEPP


13.1.1.0 General

To allow for TLS protection between the SEPP and Network Functions or SCPs
within a PLMN, the SEPP shall support:

-  TLS wildcard certificate for its domain name and generation of
telescopic FQDN based on an FQDN obtained from the received N32-f message
as specified in clause 13.1.1.1.

-  using the custom HTTP header 3gpp-Sbi-Target-apiRoot, defined in clause
5.2.3.2.4 of TS 29.500[74], in the HTTP request originated by the NF within
the SEPPs PLMN, to forward the protected HTTP Request message towards the
remote PLMN as specified in clause 13.1.1.2.

NOTE: Whether the SEPP and NFs within the SEPPs PLMN use telescopic FQDN
or the custom HTTP header is based on PLMN operators policy.


13.1.1.1 TLS protection based on telescopic FQDN and wildcard certificate

A telescopic FQDN is an FQDN with a single label as the first element and
the SEPPs domain as the trailer component. The label uniquely represents
the original FQDN.

NOTE 3: The structure of telescopic FQDN is defined in 3GPPTS23.003[19],
clause 28.5.2.

The SEPP shall generate a telescopic FQDN for the following messages
received over N32-f:

a. Nnrf_NFDiscovery_Get response HTTP message with FQDNs of a set of the
discovered NF or NF service instance(s) (see TS 29.510 [68]). The cSEPP
generates a telescopic FQDN for each target Network Function FQDN in the
Discovery response, rewrites the original FQDN with the telescopic FQDN and
forwards the modified Discovery response to the NRF.

b. Subscription message with the Callback URI in the payload of the message
(see TS 29.501 [94]). The pSEPP generates a telescopic FQDN from the
Callback URI in the Subscription message, rewrites the original FQDN in the
callback URI, and forwards the modified Subscription message to the
producer Network Function.

c. Nsmf_PDUSession_POST HTTP message from a V-SMF with PduSessionCreateData
containing the URI representing the PDU session in the V-SMF (see TS 29.502
[95]). The pSEPP generates a telescopic FQDN from the Callback URI in the
message, rewrites the original FQDN in the callback URI, and forwards the
modified message to the target H-SMF.

The following procedure illustrates how SEPPs use telescopic FQDN and
wildcard certificate to establish a TLS connection between a Network
Function or a SCP and the SEPP:

1. When the SEPP receives one of the messages identified in a-c above, it
  shall rewrite the FQDN from the received message with a telescopic FQDN
  and it forwards the modified HTTP message to the target Network Function
  or SCP inside the PLMN.

2. When the Network Function or SCP that received the telescopic FQDN in
  step 1 is ready to communicate with the target Network Function or SCP in
  another PLMN, it uses the telescopic FQDN in the Request URI of the HTTP
  Request. When communication between the Network Function or SCP and the
  SEPP that generated the telescopic FQDN is based on using the 3gpp-Sbi-
  Target-apiRoot custom HTTP header as specified in TS 29.500 [74], clause
  5.2.3.2.4, the Network Function or SCP uses the telescopic FQDN in the
  3gpp-Sbi-Target-apiRoot custom HTTP header of the HTTP Request. During
  TLS setup between the Network Function and the SEPP, the SEPP shall
  authenticate towards the Network Function or SCP using the wildcard
  certificate.

  3.   When the SEPP receives a HTTP request from the Network Function or
  SCP, the SEPP shall rewrite the telescopic FQDN with the original FQDN by
  replacing the unique delimiter in the label with the period character and
  removing its own suffix part.


13.1.1.2 TLS protection based on 3gpp-Sbi-Target-apiRoot HTTP header

The NF uses the 3gpp-Sbi-Target-apiRoot HTTP header in the HTTP Request to
convey the target FQDN to the SEPPs.

If PRINS is used on the N32-f interface, the following applies: The sending
SEPP shall use the 3gpp-Sbi-Target-apiRoot header to obtain the apiRoot to
be used in the request URI of the protected HTTP Request. It removes the
3gpp-Sbi-Target-apiRoot header before forwarding the protected HTTP Request
on the N32-f interface.

If TLS is used on the N32 interface, the following applies: The sending
SEPP shall replace the authority header in the HTTP Request with the FQDN
of the receiving SEPP before forwarding the protected HTTP Request on the
N32 interface. The sending SEPP shall not change the 3gpp-Sbi-Target-
apiRoot header.

NOTE: This solution does not require the SEPP to support TLS wildcard
certificate for its domain name during TLS setup, nor the SEPP to generate
a telescopic FQDN for the target FQDN.


13.1.2 Protection between SEPPs

TLS shall be used for N32-c connections between the SEPPs.

If there are no IPX providers between the SEPPs, TLS shall be used for N32-
f connections between the SEPPs. Different TLS connections are used for N32-
c and N32-f. If there are IPX providers which only offer IP routing service
between SEPPs, either TLS or PRINS (application layer security) shall be
used for protection of N32-f connections between the SEPPs. PRINS is
specified in clause 5.9.3 (requirements) and clause 13.2 (procedures).

If TLS is selected, the SEPP shall correlate the N32-f TLS connection with
the N32-c connection by comparing the PLMN-IDs contained in the SEPP TLS
certificates used to establish the N32-c and N32-f connections

If there are IPX providers which, in addition to IP routing, offer other
services that require modification or observation of the information and/or
additions to the information sent between the SEPPs, PRINS shall be used
for protection of N32-f connections between the SEPPs.

NOTE1a: The procedure specified in clause 13.5 for security mechanism
selection between SEPPs allows SEPPs to negotiate which security mechanism
to use for protecting NF service-related signalling over N32, and provides
robustness and future-proofness, e.g. in case new algorithms are introduced
in the future.

If PRINS is used on the N32-f interface, one of the following additional
transport protection methods should be applied between SEPP and IPX
provider for confidentiality and integrity protection:

-  NDS/IP as specified in TS 33.210 [3] and TS 33.310 [5], or

-  TLS VPN with mutual authentication following the profile given in clause
6.2 of TS 33.210 [3] and clause clause 6.1.3a of TS 33.310 [5]. The
identities in the end entity certificates shall be used for authentication
and policy checks, with the restriction that it shall be compliant with the
profile given by HTTP/2 as defined in RFC 7540 [47].

NOTE 1:  Void

NOTE 2:  Void.


13.2 Application layer security on the N32 interface


13.2.1 General

The internetwork interconnect allows secure communication between service-
consuming and a service-producing NFs in different PLMNs. Security is
enabled by the Security Edge Protection Proxies of both networks,
henceforth called cSEPP and pSEPP respectively. The SEPPs enforce
protection policies regarding application layer security thereby ensuring
integrity and confidentiality protection for those elements to be
protected.

It is assumed that there are interconnect providers between cSEPP and
pSEPP. The interconnect provider the cSEPP's operator has a business
relationship with is called cIPX, while the interconnect provider the
pSEPP's operator has a business relationship with is called pIPX. There
could be further interconnect providers in between cIPX and pIPX, but they
are assumed to be transparent and simply forward the communication.

The SEPPs use JSON Web Encryption (JWE, specified in RFC 7516 [59]) for
protecting messages on the N32-f interface, and the IPX providers use JSON
Web Signatures (JWS, specified in RFC 7515 [45]) for signing their
modifications needed for their mediation services.

For illustration, consider the case where a service-consuming NF sends a
message to a service-producing NF. If this communication is across PLMN
operators over the N32-f interface, as shown in Figure 13.2.1-1 below, the
cSEPP receives the message and applies symmetric key based application
layer protection, as defined in clause 13.2 of the present document. The
resulting JWE object is forwarded to intermediaries. The pIPX and cIPX can
offer services that require modifications of the messages transported over
the interconnect (N32) interface. These modifications are appended to the
message as digitally signed JWS objects which contain the desired changes.
The pSEPP, which receives the message from pIPX, validates the JWE object,
extracts the original message sent by the NF, validates the signature in
the JWS object and applies patches corresponding to the modifications by
intermediaries. The pSEPP then forwards the message to the destination NF.

The N32 interface consists of:

-  N32-c connection, for management of the N32 interface, and

-  N32-f connection, for sending of JWE and JWS protected messages between
the SEPPs.

The application layer security protocol for the N32 interface described in
clause 13.2 of the present document is called PRINS.



[pic]

Figure 13.2.1-1: Overview of PRINS


13.2.2 N32-c connection between SEPPs


13.2.2.1 General

When the negotiated security mechanism to use over N32, according to the
procedure in clause 13.5, is PRINS (described in clause 13.2), the SEPPs
use the established TLS connection (henceforth referred to as N32-c
connection) to negotiate the N32-f specific associated security
configuration parameters required to enforce application layer security on
HTTP messages exchanged between the SEPPs. A second N32-c connection is
established by the receiving SEPP to enable it to not only receive but also
send HTTP Requests.

The N32-c connection is used for the following purposes:

-  Key agreement: The SEPPs independently export keying material associated
with the first N32-c connection between them and use it as the pre-shared
key for generating the shared session key required.

-  Parameter exchange: The SEPPs exchange security related configuration
parameters that they need to protect HTTP messages exchanged between the
two Network Functions (NF) in their respective networks.

-  Error handling: The receiving SEPP sends an error signalling message to
the peer SEPP when it detects an error on the N32-f interface.

The following security related configuration parameters may be exchanged
between the two SEPPs:

a. Modification policy. A modification policy, as specified in clause
13.2.3.4, indicates which IEs can be modified by an IPX provider of the
sending SEPP.

b.   Data-type encryption policy. A data-type encryption policy, as
specified in 13.2.3.2, indicates which types of data will be encrypted by
the sending SEPP.

c. Cipher suites for confidentiality and integrity protection, when
application layer security is used to protect HTTP messages between them.

d. N32-f context ID. As specified in clause 13.2.2.4.1, N32-f context ID
identifies the set of security related configuration parameters applicable
to a protected message received from a SEPP in a different PLMN.


13.2.2.2 Procedure for Key agreement and Parameter exchange

1. The two SEPPs shall perform the following cipher suite negotiation to
agree on a cipher suite to use for protecting NF service related signalling
over N32-f.

1a. The SEPP which initiated the first N32-c connection shall send a
Security Parameter Exchange Request message to the responding SEPP
including the initiating SEPPs supported cipher suites. The cipher suites
shall be ordered in initiating SEPPs priority order. The SEPP shall
provide an initiating SEPPs N32-f context ID for the responding SEPP.

1b. The responding SEPP shall compare the received cipher suites to its own
supported cipher suites and shall select, based on its local policy, a
cipher suite, which is supported by both initiating SEPP and responding
SEPP.

1c. The responding SEPP shall send a Security Parameter Exchange Response
message to the initiating SEPP including the selected cipher suite for
protecting the NF service related signalling over N32. The responding SEPP
shall provide a responding SEPPs N32-f context ID for the initiating SEPP.

2. The two SEPPs may perform the following exchange of Data-type encryption
policies and Modification policies. Both SEPPs shall store protection
policies sent by the peer SEPP:

2a. The SEPP which initiated the first N32-c  connection shall send a
Security Parameter Exchange Request message to the responding SEPP
including the initiating SEPPs Data-type encryption policies, as described
in clause 13.2.3.2, and Modification policies, as described in clause
13.2.3.4.

2b. The responding SEPP shall store the policies if sent by the initiating
SEPP.

2c. The responding SEPP shall send a Security Parameter Negotiation
Response message to the initiating SEPP with the responding SEPPs suite of
protection policies.

2d. The initiating SEPP shall store the protection policy information if
sent by the responding  SEPP.

3. The two SEPPs shall exchange IPX security information lists that contain
information on IPX public keys or certificates that are needed to verify
IPX modifications at the receiving SEPP.

4. The two SEPPs shall export keying material from the TLS session
established between them using the TLS export function. For TLS 1.2, the
exporter specified in RFC 5705 [61]  shall be used. For TLS 1.3, the
exporter described in section 7.5 of RFC 8446 [60] shall be used. The
exported key shall be used as the master key to derive session keys and IVs
for the N32-f context as specified in clause 13.2.4.4.1.

5. When the responding SEPP needs to initiate traffic, e.g., error
reporting, in the reverse direction to the sending SEPP, the responding
SEPP in the first N32-c connection shall now setup a second N32-c
connection by establishing a mutually authenticated TLS connection with the
peer SEPP.

NOTE:  The second N32-c connection setup by the responding SEPP does not
perform the negotiation of steps 1-4.

6. The two SEPPs start exchanging NF to NF service related signalling over
N32-f and tear down the N32-c connection. The SEPPs may initiate new N32-c
TLS sessions for any further N32-c communication that may occur over time
while application layer security is applied to N32-f.


13.2.2.3 Procedure for error detection and handling in SEPP

Errors can occur on an active N32-c connection or on one or more N32-f
connections between two SEPPs.

When an error is detected, the SEPP shall map the error to an appropriate
cause code. The SEPP shall create a signalling message to inform the peer
SEPP, with cause code as one of its parameters.

The SEPP shall use the N32-c connection to send the signalling message to
the peer SEPP. If the old N32-c connection has been terminated, it uses a
new N32-c connection instead.

If the error occurred in the processing of the one or more N32-f
message(s), the SEPP shall include the corresponding message ID (s),
obtained from the metadata section of the N32-f message, as a parameter in
the signalling message. This allows the peer SEPP to identify the source
message(s) (HTTP Request or Response) on which the other SEPP found the
error.

NOTE:  Local action taken by either SEPP is out of 3GPP scope.


13.2.2.4 N32-f Context


13.2.2.4.0  N32-f parts

The N32-f context consists of the following main parts as illustrated in
Figure 13.2.2.4.0-1:

1. N32-f context ID

2. N32-f peer information

3. N32-f security context

4. N32-f context information

[pic]

Figure 13.2.2.4.0-1: N32-f context overview


13.2.2.4.1  N32-f context ID

The N32-f context ID is used to refer to an N32-f context. The SEPPs shall
create the N32-f context ID during the N32-c negotiation and use it over
N32-f to inform the receiving peer which security context to use for
decryption of a received message.

The initiating SEPP shall send the initiating SEPPs N32-f context ID to
the responding SEPP which the responding SEPP shall use to identify the N32-
f connection with this initiating SEPP. Vice versa, the responding SEPP
shall send the responding SEPPs N32-f context ID to the initiating SEPP
which the initiating SEPP shall use to identify the N32-f connection with
this responding SEPP. To avoid collision of the N32-f context ID value, the
SEPPs shall select the N32-f precontext ID as a random value during the
exchange over N32-c.

During transfer of application data over N32-f, the SEPP shall include the
N32-f context ID in a separate IE in the metadata part of the JSON
structure, see clause 13.2.4.2. The receiving SEPP shall use this
information to apply the correct key and parameters during decryption and
validation.


13.2.2.4.2  N32-f peer information

The  N32-f connection between SEPPs is bidirectional and consists of the
two SEPP endpoints and possibly up to two IPX providers. The SEPPs are
identified by the PLMN ID and additionally a SEPP ID to distinguish between
several SEPPs in the same PLMN. The remote SEPP address is necessary for
routing the messages to the correct destination.

The N32-f peer information shall consist of the following parameters:

-  Remote PLMN ID;

-  Remote SEPP ID;

-  Remote SEPP address.


13.2.2.4.3  N32-f security context

The N32-c initial handshake described in clause 13.2.2.2 establishes
session keys, IVs and negotiated cipher suites. Counters are used for
replay protection. Modification policies are identified by modification
policy IDs, to be able to verify received messages that have undergone IPX
modifications.

The N32-f security context shall consist of the following parameters:

-  Session keys

-  Negotiated cipher suites

-  Data type encryption policy IDs

-  Modification policy list (if IPXs are used)

-  Modification policy IDs

-  IPX provider identifier

-  Counters

-  IVs

-  List of security information of the IPX providers connected to the SEPPs
(IPX security information list)

-  IPX provider identifier

-  List of raw public keys or certificates for that IPX


13.2.2.4.4  N32-f context information

The N32-f context information shall consist of the following parameters:

-  Validity.

-  Usage (PRINS).


13.2.3 Protection policies for N32 application layer solution


13.2.3.1 Overview of protection policies

The protection policy suite is comprised of a data-type encryption policy
and a modification policy. Together, these policies determine which part of
a certain message shall be confidentiality protected and which part of a
certain message shall be modifiable by IPX providers. The SEPP shall apply
the protection policies for application layer protection of messages on the
N32-f interface.

There are two types of protection policies, namely:

-  Data-type encryption policy: specifies which data types need to be
confidentiality protected;

-  Modification policy: specifies which IEs are modifiable by
intermediaries.

In addition, there is a mapping between the data-types in the data-type
encryption policy and the IEs in NF API descriptions which is given in a NF-
API data-type placement mapping.


13.2.3.2 Data-type encryption policy

The SEPP shall contain an operator-controlled protection policy that
specifies which types of data shall be encrypted. The data-types defined
are the following:

-  Data of the type 'SUPI';

-  Data of the type 'authentication vector';

-  Data of the type 'location data';

-  Data of the type 'cryptographic material';

-  Data of the type 'authorization token'.

The policy shall be specific per roaming partner. The policy shall contain
a policy identifier and a release number referring to the release it is
applicable for.

The data-type encryption policies in the two partner SEPPs shall be equal
to enforce a consistent ciphering of IEs on N32-f.


13.2.3.3 NF API data-type placement mapping

Each NF API data-type placement mapping shall contain the following:

-  Which IEs contain data of the type 'SUPI' or type 'NAI'.

-  Which IEs contain data of the type 'authentication vector.

-  Which IEs contain data of the type 'location data'.

-  Which IEs contain data of the type 'cryptographic material'.

-  Which IEs contain data of the type 'authorization token'.

The location of the IEs refers to the location of the IEs after the SEPP
has rewritten the message for transmission over N32-f.

An NF API data-type placement mapping shall furthermore contain data that
identifies the NF API, namely

-  The name of the NF;

-  The API version;

-  An identifier for the NF API data-type placement mapping;

-  The NFs 3GPP Release version.

NOTE:  Larger networks can contain multiple NFs with the same API, e.g.
three AMFs. The NF API policy applies to all NFs with the same API.

The NF API data-type placement mapping shall reside in the SEPP.


13.2.3.4 Modification policy

The SEPP shall contain an operator-controlled policy that specifies which
IEs can be modified by the IPX provider directly related to this particular
SEPP. These IEs refer to the IEs after the sending SEPP has rewritten the
message.

Each PLMN-operator shall agree the modification policy with the IPX
provider it has a business relationship with prior to establishment of an
N32 connection. Each modification policy applies to one individual relation
between PLMN-operator and IPX provider. To cover the whole N32 connection,
both involved roaming partners shall exchange their modification policies.

NOTE 1:  In order to validate modifications for messages received on the
N32-f interface, the operators roaming partners will have to know the
overall modification policy.

NOTE 2: Modification includes removal and addition of new IE. IEs therefore
may not be present in the rewritten message.

The IEs that the IPX is allowed to modify shall be specified in a list
giving an enumeration of JSON paths within the JSON object created by the
SEPP. Wildcards may be used to specify paths.

This policy shall be specific per roaming partner and per IPX provider that
is used for the specific roaming partner.

The modification policy shall reside in the SEPP.

For each roaming parter, the SEPP shall be able to store a policy for
receiving.

The following basic validation rules shall always be applied irrespective
of the policy exchanged between two roaming partners:

-  IEs requiring encryption shall not be inserted at a different location
in the JSON object.


13.2.3.5 Provisioning of the policies in the SEPP

The SEPP shall contain an interface that the operator can use to manually
configure the protection policies in the SEPP.

The SEPP shall be able to store and process the following policies for
outgoing messages:

-  A generic data-type encryption policy;

-  Roaming partner specific data-type encryption policies that will take
precedence over a generic data-type encryption policy if present;

-  NF API data-type placement mappings;

-  Multiple modification policies, to handle modifications that are
specific per IPX provider and modification policies that are specific per
IPX provider and roaming partner.

The SEPP shall also be able to store and process the following policies for
incoming messages during the initial connection establishment via N32-c:

-  Roaming partner specific data-type encryption policies;

-  Roaming partner specific modification policies that specify which fields
can be modified by which of its IPX providers.


13.2.3.6 Precedence of policies in the SEPP

This clause specifies the order of precedence of data-type encryption
policies and modification policies available in a SEPP.

In increasing order of precedence, the following policies apply for a
message to be sent on N32:

1. The set of default rules specified in the present specification:

-  For the data-type encryption policy, the rules on data-types that are
mandatory to be encrypted according to clause 5.9.3.3.

-  For the modification policy, the basic validation rules defined in
clause 13.2.3.4.

2. Manually configured policies:

   - For the data-type encryption policy: rules according to clause
13.2.3.2, on a per roaming partner basis.

   - For the modification policy: rules according to clause 13.2.3.4, per
roaming partner and per IPX provider that is used for the specific roaming
partner.

NOTE 1:  It is assumed that operators agree both data-type encryption and
modification policy in advance, for example as part of their bilateral
roaming agreement. The protection policies exchanged via N32-c during the
initial connection establishment only serve the purpose of detecting
possible misconfigurations.

NOTE 2:  It is assumed that the default rules and manually configured
policies do not overlap or contradict each other. The manually configured
policies are used to extend the protection by the default rules in the
present document and are applied on top of them.

When a SEPP receives a data-type encryption or modification policy on N32-c
as specified in clause 13.2.2.2, it shall compare it to the one that has
been manually configured for this specific roaming partner and IPX
provider. If a mismatch occurs for one of the two policies, the SEPP shall
perform one of the following actions, according to operator policy:

-  Send the error message as specified in TS 29.573 [73], clause 6.1.4.3.2,
 to the peer SEPP.

-  Create a local warning.


13.2.4 N32-f connection between SEPPs


13.2.4.1 General

The SEPP receives HTTP/2 request/response messages from the Network
Function. It shall perform the following actions on these messages before
they are sent on the N32-f interface to the SEPP in the other PLMN:

a) It parses the incoming message and, if present, rewrites the telescopic
FQDN of the receiving NF to obtain the original FQDN as described in clause
13.1.

b)   It reformats the message to produce the input to JSON Web Encryption
(JWE) [59] as described in clause 13.2.4.3.

c) It applies JWE to the input created in b) to protect the reformatted
message as described in clause 13.2.4.4.

d) It encapsulates the resulting JWE object into a HTTP/2 message (as the
body of the message) and sends the HTTP/2 message to the SEPP in the other
PLMN over the N32-f interface.

The message may be routed via the cIPX and pIPX nodes. These IPX nodes may
modify messages as follows:

a) The IPX node recovers the cleartext part of the HTTP message from the
JWE object, modifies it according to the modification policy, and
calculates an "operations" JSON Patch object. It then creates a temporary
JSON object with the "operators" JSON Patch object and some other
parameters for replay protection etc. as described in clause 13.2.4.5.1.

b) The IPX node uses the temporary JSON object as input into JSON Web
Signature (JWS) [45] to create a JWS object, as described in clause
13.2.4.5.2.

c) The IPX node appends the JWS object to the received message and sends it
to the next hop.

The JWS objects generated by the two IPX providers form an auditable chain
of modifications that to the receiving SEPP shall apply to the parsed
message after verifying that the patches conform to the modification
policy.

Encryption of IEs shall take place end to end between cSEPP and pSEPP.

A SEPP shall not include IEs in the clear that are encrypted elsewhere in
the JSON object.

A SEPP shall verify that an intermediate IPX has not moved or copied an
encrypted IE to a location that would be reflected from the producer NF in
an IE without encryption.


13.2.4.2 Overall Message payload structure for message reformatting at SEPP

The SEPP reformats an HTTP message received from an internal Network
Function into two temporary JSON objects that will be intput to JWE:

a. The dataToIntegrityProtect, containing information that is only
integrity protected. It consists of the following:

-  clearTextEncapsulationMessage: contains the complete original HTTP
message, excluding attribute values which require encryption and, including
the pseudo-header fields, HTTP headers and HTTP message body.

-  metadata: contains SEPP generated information i.e. authorizedIPX ID, N32-
f message ID and N32-f context ID.

b. The dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher: contains attribute values of the
original message that require both encryption and integrity protection.

For the details of JSON representation of a reformatted HTTP message, refer
to TS 29.573 [92].


13.2.4.3 Message reformatting in sending SEPP


13.2.4.3.1  dataToIntegrityProtect


13.2.4.3.1.1  clearTextEncapsulatedMessage

The clearTextEncapsulatedMessage is a JSON object that contains the non-
encrypted portion of the original message.Specifically, it consists of the
following objects:

1.a) Pseudo_Headers  the JSON object that includes all the Pseudo Headers
in the message.

- For HTTP Request messages, the object contains one entry for each of the
":method", ":path", ":scheme" and ":authority" pseudo headers. If the
":path" pseudoheader contains multiple parts separated by a slash (/) or
includes a query parameter (following a "?"), an array is used to represent
:path, with one element per part of the path (i.e. per "directory").

NOTE:  This enables encryption of individual elements of the path (e.g. if
SUPI is passed).

- For HTTP Response messages, the object contains the ":status" pseudo
header.

1.b) HTTP_Headers  the JSON object that includes all the Headers in the
message.

All the headers of the request are put into a JSON array called
HTTP_Headers.Each entry contains a header name and value, where the value
part can be an encoded index to the dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher block,
if the header value is encrypted.

1.c) Payload  the JSON object that includes the content of the payload of
the HTTP message.

Each attribute or IE in the payload shall form a single entry in the
Payload JSON object. If there is any attribute value that requires
encryption, it shall be moved into the dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher JSON
object (clause 13.2.4.2), and the original value in this element shall be
replaced by the index in the form {"encBlockIdx": <num>} where "num" is the
index of the corresponding entry in the dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher
array.


13.2.4.3.1.2  metadata

The JSON object containing information added by the sending SEPP. It shall
contain:

a) N32-f message ID: Unique identifier (64-bit integer) representing a HTTP
Request/Response transaction between two SEPPs. The N32-f message ID is
generated by the sending SEPP and included in the HTTP Request sent over
the N32 interface. The receiving SEPP uses the same N32-f message ID when
it responds back with a HTTP Response. The N32-f message ID is included in
the metadata portion of the JSON structure.

b) authorizedIPX ID: String identifying the first hop IPX (cIPX or pIPX)
that is authorized to update the message. This field shall always be
present. When there is no IPX that is authorized to update, the value of
this field is set to  null. The sending SEPP selects one of the IPX
providers from the list exchanged with the other SEPP during parameter
exchange over N32-c and includes its identifier value in this field.

c) N32-f context ID: Unique identifier representing the N32-f context
information used for protecting the message. This is exchanged during
parameter exchange over N32-c (clause 13.2.2.4.1).


13.2.4.3.2  dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher

The dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher is a JSON patch document as per RFC
6902 [64] that contains all the attribute values that require both
encryption and integrity protection. Attribute values may come from any
part of the original HTTP message  Pseudo_Headers, HTTP_Headers and
Payload.

The JSON array shall contain one array entry per attribute value that needs
encryption. Each array entry represents the value of the attribute to be
protected, and the index in the array is used to reference the protected
value within the dataToIntegrityProtect block. This associates each
attribute in the dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher block with the original
attribute in the dataToIntegrityProtect block. This is needed to reassemble
the original message at the receiving SEPP.


13.2.4.4 Protection using JSON Web Encryption (JWE)


13.2.4.4.0  General

The SEPP shall use JSON Web Encryption (JWE) as specified in RFC 7516 [59]
for the protection of reformatted HTTP messages between the SEPPs. All
encryption methods supported by JWE are AEAD methods, i.e. methods that
encrypt and integrity protect  in one single operation and can additionally
integrity protect additional data.

The dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher and dataToIntegrityProtect blocks shall
be input to JWE as plaintext and JWE Additional Authenticated Data (AAD)
respectively. The JWE AEAD algorithm generates JWE encrypted text
(ciphertext) and a JWE Authentication Tag (Message Authentication Code).
The ciphertext is the output from symmetrically encrypting the plaintext,
while the authentication tag is a value that verifies the integrity of both
the generated ciphertext and the Additional Authenticated Data.

The Flattened JWE JSON Serialization syntax shall be used to represent JWE
as a JSON object.

The session key shared between the two SEPPs, as specified in clause
13.2.4.4.1, shall be used as the Content Encryption Key (CEK) value to the
algorithm indicated in the Encryption algorithm ("enc") parameter in the
JOSE header. The algorithm ("alg") parameter in the JOSE header denoting
the key exchange method shall be set to "dir", i.e. "Direct use of a shared
symmetric key as the CEK".

The 3GPP profile for supported cipher suites in the "enc" parameter is
described in clause 13.2.4.9.

The generated JWE object shall be transmitted on the N32-f interface in the
payload body of a SEPP to SEPP HTTP/2 message.


13.2.4.4.1  N32-f key hierarchy

The N32-f key hierarchy is based on the N32-f master key generated during
the N32-c initial handshake by TLS key export. The N32-f key hierarchy
consists of two pairs of session keys and two pairs of IV salts, which are
used in two different HTTP/2 sessions. In one Session the N32-c initiator
acts as the HTTP client and in the second the N32-c responder acts as the
client.

If the exported master secret is reused to set up multiple HTTP sessions or
to set up new HTTP sessions on stream ID exhaustion, a new, unique, N32-f
Context ID shall be generated to avoid key and IV re-use.

The master key shall be obtained from the TLS exporter. The export function
takes 3 arguments: Label, Context, Length (in octets) of the desired
output. For the N32 Master key derivation, the Label shall be the IANA
registered label "EXPORTER_3GPP_N32_MASTER" [89], the Context shall be ""
(the empty string) and the Length shall be 64.

The N32 key derivation function N32-KDF shall be based on HKDF [62] and
shall use only the HKDF-Expand function as the initial key material has
been generated securely:

   N32-KDF (label, L) = HKDF-Expand (N32-f master key, "N32" || N32-Context-
ID || label, L),

where

   - label is a string used for key separation,

   - L is the length of output keying material in octets.

Each run of N32-KDF (label, L) produces either one session key or one IV
salt.

There are two pairs of session keys and IV salts to be derived.

NOTE:  In AES-GCM re-use of one IV may reveal the integrity key (Jouxs
Forbidden attack). The binding of session keys and IV salts to N32-f
context IDs and labels is essential to protect against inadvertent use of
the same key with a repeated IV.

The labels for the JWE keys are:

-  "parallel_request_key"

-  "parallel_response_key"

-  "reverse_request_key", and

-  "reverse_response_key".

The keys derived with labels starting parallel shall be used for
request/responses in an HTTP session with the N32-c initiating SEPP acting
as the client (i.e. in parallel to the N32-c connection). The keys derived
with the labels starting reverse shall be used for an HTTP session with the
N32-c responding SEPP acting as the client.

To generate the IV salts, the length is 8 and the labels are:

-  "parallel_request_iv_salt",

-  "parallel_response_iv_salt",

-  "reverse_request_iv_salt", and

-  "reverse_response_iv_salt".

The 96-bit nonce for AES_GCM shall be constructed as the concatenation of
the IV salt (8 octets, 64-bits) and the sequence counter, SEQ, following
section 8.2.1 of NIST Special Publication 800-38D [63]:

   Nonce = IV salt || SEQ.

The sequence counter shall be a 32-bit unsigned integer that starts at zero
and is incremented for each invocation of the encryption.  A different
sequence counter shall be maintained for each IV salt.



13.2.4.5 Message modifications in IPX


13.2.4.5.1  modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect

[pic]

Figure 13.2.4.5.1-1 Example of JSON representation of IPX provider
modifications

This is a temporary JSON object generated by an IPX provider as it modifies
the original message. It shall contain the following:

a) Operations  This is a JSON patch document that captures IPX
modifications based on RFC 6902 [64]. If no patch is required, the
operations element shall be set to null.

b) Identity  This is the identity of the IPX performing the modification.

c) Tag  A JSON string element to capture the tag value (JWE
Authentication tag) in the JWE object generated by the sending SEPP. This
is required for replay protection.

NOTE:  Since there is no central registry that can ensure unique IPX
Identities, it is expected that an IPX will include its Fully Quantified
Domain Name (FQDN) in the JSON modification object.


13.2.4.5.2  Modifications by IPX

NOTE 1:  It is assumed that operators act as a certification authority for
IPX providers they have a direct business relationship with. In order to
authorize N32-f message modifications, operators sign a digital certificate
for each of these IPX providers and provide it to both the IPX provider
itself as well as their roaming partners to enable them to validate any
modifications by this IPX provider.

Only cIPX and pIPX shall be able to modify messages between cSEPP and
pSEPP. In cases of messages from cSEPP to pSEPP, the cIPX is the first
intermediary, while the pIPX is the second intermediary. In cases of
messages from pSEPP to cSEPP the pIPX is the first intermediary, while the
cIPX is the second intermediary.

The first intermediary shall parse the encapsulated request (i.e. the
clearTextEncapsulationMsg in the dataToIntegrityProtect block) and
determine which changes are required. The first intermediary creates an
Operations JSON patch document to describe the differences between received
and desired message, using the syntax and semantic from RFC 6902 [64], such
that, when applying the JSON patch to the encapsulated request the result
will be the desired request. If no patch is required, the operations
element is null.

NOTE 2:  It is necessary to create a JWS object even if no patch is
required to prevent deletion of modifications.

The first intermediary shall create a modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect JSON
object as described in clause 13.2.4.5.1. The JSON object shall include the
intermediarys identity and the JWE authentication tag, which associates
this update by the intermediary with the JWE object created by the sending
SEPP.

The first intermediary shall use the modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect JSON
object as input to JWS to create a JWS object. The first intermediary shall
append the generated JWS object to the payload in the HTTP message and then
send the messageto the next hop.

The second intermediary shall parse the encapsulated request, apply the
modifications described in the JSON patch appended by the first
intermediary and determine further modifications required for obtaining the
desired request. The second intermediary shall record these modifications
in an additional JSON patch against the JSON object resulting from
application of the first intermediary's JSON patch. If no patch is
required, the operations element for the second JSON patch is null.

The second intermediary shall create a modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect JSON
object as described in clause 13.2.4.5.1. It shall include its identity and
the JWE authentication tag, which associates this update by the second
intermediary with the JWE object created by the sending SEPP.

The second intermediary shall use the modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect JSON
object as input to JWS to create a JWS object. The second intermediary
shall append the generated JWS object to the payload in the HTTP message
and then send the message to the receiving SEPP.


13.2.4.6 Protecting IPX modifications using JSON Web Signature (JWS)

The IPX providers shall use JSON Web Signature (JWS) as specified in RFC
7515 [45] for the protection of IPX provider modified attributes. The
mechanism described in this clause uses signatures, i.e. asymmetric
methods, with private/public key pairs.

More specifically, when an IPX node modifies one or more attributes of the
original HTTP message and creates a modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect object
to record its modifications, it shall use JWS to integrity protect the
modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect object.

The IPX provider shall use its private key as input to JWS for generating
the signature representing the contents of the
modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect object.

The "alg" parameter in the JOSE header indicates the chosen signature
algorithm. The 3GPP profile for supported algorithms is described in clause
13.2.4.9.

The Flattened JWS JSON Serialization syntax shall be used to represent JWS
as a JSON object.


13.2.4.7 Message verification by the receiving SEPP

The receiving SEPP shall decrypt the JWE ciphertext using the shared
session key and the following parameters obtained from the JWE object 
Initialization Vector, Additional Authenticated Data value
(clearTextEncapsulatedMessage in  "aad") and JWE Authentication Tag (
"tag").

The receiving SEPP shall check the integrity and authenticity of the
clearTextEncapsulatedMessage and the encrypted text by verifying the JWE
Authentication Tag in the JWE object with the JWE AAD algorithm. The
algorithm returns the decrypted plaintext (dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher)
only if the JWE Authentication Tag is correct.

The receiving SEPP refers to the NF API data-type placement mapping table
to re-construct the original reformatted message by updating corresponding
entries in clearTextEncapsulatedMessage with values in the
dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher array.

The receiving SEPP shall next verify IPX provider updates, if included, by
verifying the JWS signatures added by the intermediaries. The SEPP shall
verify the JWS signature, using the corresponding raw public key or
certificate that is contained in the IPX providers security information
list obtained during parameter exchange in the related N32-c connection
setup or, alternatively, has been configured for the particular peer SEPP.
It shall then check that the raw public key or certificate of the JWS
signature IPX's Identity in the modifiedDataToIntegrity block matches to
the IPX provider referred to in the "authorizedIPX ID" field added by the
sending SEPP, based on the information given in the IPX provider security
information list.

The receiving SEPP shall check whether the modifications performed by the
intermediaries were permitted by the respective modification policies. The
receiving SEPP shall use the modification policy of the cIPX obtained
during parameter exchange in the related N32-c connection setup, and use
the modification policy of pIPX configured within the receiving SEPP.

If this is the case, the receiving SEPP shall apply the patches in the
Operations field in order, perform plausibility checks, and create a new
HTTP request according to the "patched" clearTextEncapsulatedMessage.

The receiving SEPP shall verify that the PLMN-ID contained in the incoming
N32-f message matches the PLMN-ID in the related N32-f context.


13.2.4.8 Procedure

The following clause illustrates the message flow between the two SEPPs
with modifications from cIPX and pIPX.

[pic]

Figure 13.2.4.8-1 Message flow between two SEPPs

1. The cSEPP receives an HTTP request message from a network function. If
the message contains a telescopic FQDN, the cSEPP removes its domain name
from this FQDN to obtain the original FQDN as described in clause 13.1.

  2. The cSEPP shall reformate the HTTP Request message as follows:

a. The cSEPP shall generate blocks (JSON objects) for integrity protected
data and encrypted data, and protecting them:

The cSEPP shall encapsulate the HTTP request into a
clearTextEncapsulatedMessage block containing the following child JSON
objects:

-  Pseudo_Headers

-  HTTP_Headers with one element per header of the original request.

-  Payload that contains the message body of the original request.

For each attribute that require end-to-end encryption between the two
SEPPs, the attribute value is copied into a dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher
JSON object and the attribute's value in the clearTextEncapsulatedMessage
is replaced by the index of attribute value in the
dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher block.

The cSEPP shall create a metadata block that contains the N32-f context ID,
message ID generated by the cSEPP for this request/response transaction and
next hop identity.

The cSEPP shall protect the dataToIntegrityProtect block and the
dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher block as per clause 13.2.4.4. This results
in a single JWE object representing the protected HTTP Request message.

b. The cSEPP shall generate payload for the SEPP to SEPP HTTP message:

   The JWE object becomes the payload of the new HTTP message generated by
cSEPP.

  3. The cSEPP shall use HTTP POST to send the HTTP message to the first
  intermediary.

  4. The first intermediary (e.g. visited network's IPX provider) shall
  create a new modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect JSON object with three
  elements:

a. The Operations JSON patch document contains modifications performed by
the first intermediary as per RFC 6902 [64].

b. The first intermediary shall include its own identity in the Identity
field of the modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect.

c. The first intermediary shall copy the "tag" element, present in the JWE
object generated by the cSEPP, into the modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect
object. This acts as a replay protection for updates made by the first
intermediary.

  The intermediary shall execute JWS on the modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect
  JSON object and append the resulting JWS object to the message.

  5. The first intermediary shall send the modified HTTP message request to
  the second intermediary (e.g. home network's IPX) as in step 3.

  6. The second intermediary shall perform further modifications as in step
  4 if required. The second intermediary shall further execute JWS on the
  modifiedDataToIntegrityProtect JSON object and shall append the resulting
  JWS object to the message.

  7. The second intermediary shall send the modified HTTP message to the
  pSEPP as in step 3.

 NOTE 1: The behaviour of the intermediaries is not normative, but the
pSEPP assumes that behaviour for processing the resulting request.

8. The pSEPP receives the message and shall perform the following actions:

-  The pSEPP extracts the serialized values from the components of the JWE
object.

-  The pSEPP invokes the JWE AEAD algorithm to check the integrity of the
message and decrypt the dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher block. This results
in entries in the encrypted block becoming visible in cleartext.

-  The pSEPP updates the clearTextEncapsulationMessage block in the message
by replacing the references to the dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher block
with the referenced decrypted values from the
dataToIntegrityProtectAndCipher block.

-  The pSEPP then verifies IPX provider updates of the attributes in the
modificationsArray. It checks whether the modifications performed by the
intermediaries were permitted by policy.

   The pSEPP further verifies that the PLMN-ID contained in the message is
equal to the "Remote PLMN-ID" in the related N32-f context.

-  The pSEPP updates the modified values of the attributes in the
clearTextEncapsulationMessage in order.

The pSEPP shall re-assemble the full HTTP Request from the contents of the
clearTextEncapsulationMessage.



  9. The pSEPP shall send the HTTP request resulting from step 8 to the
  home network's NF.

10.-18.  These steps are analogous to steps 1.-9.


13.2.4.9 JOSE profile

SEPPs shall follow the JWE profile defined in TS 33.210 [3] with the
restriction that it shall only use AES GCM with a 128-bit or 256-bit key.
The security considerations for the use of AES GCM in section 8.4 of RFC
7518 [59] shall be taken into account. In particular, the same key shall
not be used more than 232 times and an IV value shall not be used more than
once with the same key.

SEPPs and IPXs shall follow the JWS profile as defined in TS 33.210 [3]
with the restriction that they shall only use ES256 algorithm.


13.3 Authentication and static authorization


13.3.0 Static authorization

Static authorization is based on local authorization policy at the NRF and
the NF Service Producer. It can be used when token-based authorization is
not used.

During the Nnrf_NFDiscovery procedure, the NRF ensures that the NF Service
Consumer is authorized to discover the NF Service Producer service(s) as
specified in clause 13.3.1.3 of this document.

If token-based authorization is not used within one PLMN and the NF Service
Producer receives a service request, the NF Service Producer shall check
authorization of the NF Service Consumer based on its local policy. If the
NF Service Consumer is authorized to receive the service requested, the NF
Service Producer shall grant the NF Service Consumer access to the service
API.


13.3.1 Authentication and authorization between network functions and NRF


13.3.1.1 Direct communication

NRF and NF shall authenticate each other during discovery, registration,
and access token request.

In direct communication, NF and NRF shall use one of the following methods
for authentication:

-  If the PLMN uses protection at the transport layer as described in
clause 13.1, authentication provided by the transport layer protection
solution shall be used for mutual authentication of the NRF and NF.

-  If the PLMN does not use protection at the transport layer, mutual
authentication of NRF and NF may be implicit by NDS/IP or physical security
(see clause 13.1).


13.3.1.2 Indirect communication

In indirect communication, NF and NRF shall use one of the following
methods for authentication:

-  Mutual authentication between NF and NRF provided by the transport layer
protection solution.

-  Client credentials assertion (CCA) based authentication as specified in
clause 13.3.8.

NOTE 1:  Client credentials assertion authentication is based on a CCA
token sent by the NF Service Consumer to the NRF via an intermediate such
as the SCP. CCA based authentication does not provide authentication of the
NRF towards the NF Service Consumer or protection of the service request
sent by the NF Service Consumer to the NRF.

-  Implicit, i.e. by relying on authentication between NF Service Consumer
and SCP, and between SCP and NRF, provided by the hop-by-hop security
protection at the transport layer, NDS/IP, or physical security.

NOTE 2:  Mutual authentication between NF Service Consumer and NRF is not
achieved with hop-by-hop security.

NOTE 3:  If only hop-by-hop security is used in a PLMN, the NRF is not able
to verify that an access token request sent by SCP on behalf of a certain
NF Service Consumer, is actually authorized by this consumer.


13.3.1.3 Authorization of discovery request and error handling

When NRF receives message from unauthenticated NF, NRF shall support error
handling, and may send back an error message. The same procedure shall be
applied vice versa.

After successful authentication between NRF and NF, the NRF shall decide
whether the NF is authorized to perform discovery and registration.

In the non-roaming scenario, the NRF authorizes the
Nnrf_NFDiscovery_Request based on the profile of the expected NF/NF service
and the type of the NF Service Consumer, as described in clause 4.17.4 of
TS23.502 [8].

In the roaming scenario, the NRF of the NF Service Producer shall authorize
the Nnrf_NFDiscovery_Request based on the profile of the expected NF/NF
Service, the type of the NF Service Consumer and the serving network ID.

If the NRF finds NF Service Consumer is not allowed to discover the
expected NF instances(s) as described in clause 4.17.4 of TS 23.502[8], NRF
shall support error handling, and may send back an error message.

NOTE 1:  Void.

When a NF consumes the Nnrf_NFManagement or the Nnrf_NFDiscovery services
provided by the NRF, the usage of the OAuth 2.0 access token for
authorization between the NF and the NRF is optional.


13.3.2 Authentication and authorization between network functions


13.3.2.1 Direct communication

In direct communication, authentication between network functions within
one PLMN shall use one of the following methods:

-  If the PLMN uses protection at the transport layer as described in
clause 13.1, authentication provided by the transport layer protection
solution shall be used for authentication between NFs.

-  If the PLMN does not use protection at the transport layer,
authentication between NFs within one PLMN may be implicit by NDS/IP or
physical security (see clause 13.1).

If the PLMN uses token-based authorization, the network shall use
protection at the transport layer as described in clause 13.1.


13.3.2.2 Indirect communication

In indirect communication scenarios, the NF Service Producer and NF Service
Consumer shall use implicit authentication by relying on authentication
between NF Service Consumer and SCP, and between SCP and NF Service
Producer, provided by the transport layer protection solution, NDS/IP, or
physical security.

NOTE 0: Mutual authentication between NF Service Consumer and NF Service
Producer is not achieved with hop-by-hop security.

If the PLMN uses token-based authorization as specified by clause 13.4.1.2
and the PLMNs policy mandates that the NRF authenticates the NF Service
Consumer before granting an access token, the access token indicates to the
NF Service Producer that the NF Service Consumer has been authenticated by
the NRF.

If additional authentication of the NF Service Consumer is required, the NF
Service Producer authenticates the NF Service Consumer at the application
layer using CCA based authentication as specified in clause 13.3.8.

The NF Service Consumer authentication based on CCA based authentication is
optional to use, and based on operator policy.


13.3.2.3 Inter-PLMN NF to NF communication

NOTE 1: Void

NOTE 2: Void

The Inter-PLMN UP Security functionality (IPUPS) as described in clauses
4.2.2 and 5.9.3.4 provide a standardised solution for binding 5G SBA REST
Service Operations between the PLMN V-SMF and H-SMF over N16 / N32 to GTP-U
over N9 in roaming scenarios.


13.3.2.4 Error handling

When an NF receives a message from an unauthenticated NF, the receiving NF
shall support error handling, and may send back an error message.


13.3.3 Authentication and authorization between SEPP and network functions

NOTE 1: This clause also describes authentication and authorization between
SEPP and NRF, because the NRF is a network function.

Authentication between SEPP and network functions within one PLMN shall use
one of the following methods:

-  If the PLMN uses protection at the transport layer, authentication
provided by the transport layer protection solution shall be used for
authentication between SEPP and NFs.

-  If the PLMN does not use protection at the transport layer,
authentication between SEPP and NFs within one PLMN may be implicit by
NDS/IP or physical security (see clause 13.1).

A network function and the SEPP shall mutually authenticate before the SEPP
forwards messages sent by the network function to network functions in
other PLMN, and before the SEPP forwards messages sent by other network
functions in other PLMN to the network function.


13.3.4 Authentication and authorization between SEPPs

Authentication and authorization between SEPPs in different PLMNs is
defined in clause 13.2.


13.3.5 Authentication between SEPP and SCP

Authentication between SEPP and SCP within one PLMN shall use one of the
following methods:

-  If the PLMN uses protection at the transport layer, authentication
provided by the transport layer protection solution shall be used for
authentication between SEPP and SCP.

-  If the PLMN does not use protection at the transport layer,
authentication between SEPP and SCP within one PLMN may be implicit by
NDS/IP or physical security (see clause 13.1).

A SCP and the SEPP shall mutually authenticate before forwarding incoming
or outgoing requests.


13.3.6 Authentication and authorization between SCP and network functions

The SCP and network functions shall use one of the following methods
described in clause 13.1 to mutually authenticate each other before service
layer messages can be exchanged on that interface:

-  If the PLMN uses protection at the transport layer, authentication
provided by the transport layer protection solution shall be used for
mutual authentication of the SCP and the network functions.

-  If the PLMN does not use protection at the transport layer, mutual
authentication of the SCP and network functions may be implicit by NDS/IP
or physical security.

Authentication between the SCP and the Network Function may be implicit by
co-location.

Authorization between the SCP and NFs is based on local authorization
policy. Regarding the authorization of access token requests sent by an SCP
on behalf of an NF Service Consumer, NOTE 3 in clause 13.3.1.2 applies.




13.3.7 Authentication and authorization between SCPs

SCPs shall use one of the following methods as described in 13.1 to
mutually authenticate each other before service layer messages can be
exchanged on that interface:

-  If the PLMN uses protection at the transport layer, authentication
provided by the transport layer protection solution shall be used for
mutual authentication of the SCPs.

-  If the PLMN does not use protection at the transport layer, mutual
authentication of the two SCPs may be implicit by NDS/IP or physical
security.

Authorization between SCPs is based on local authorization policy.


13.3.8 Client credentials assertion based authentication


13.3.8.1 General

The Client credentials assertion (CCA) is a token signed by the NF Service
Consumer. It enables the NF Service Consumer to authenticate towards the
receiving end point (NRF, NF Service Producer) by including the signed
token in a service request.

It includes the NF Service Consumers NF Instance ID that can be checked
against the certificate by the NF Service Producer. The CCA includes a
timestamp as basis for restriction of its lifetime.

CCAs are expected to be more short-lived than NRF generated access tokens.
So, they can be used in deployments with requirements for tokens with
shorter lifetime for NF-NF communication. There is a trade-off that when
the lifetime of the CCA is too short, it requires the NF Service Consumer
to generate a new CCA for every new service request.

The CCA cannot be used in the roaming case, as the NF Service Producer in
the home PLMN will not be able to verify the signature of the NF Service
Consumer in the visited PLMN unless cross-certification process is
established between the two PLMNs through one of the mechanisms specified
in TS 33.310.

CCA does not provide integrity protection on the full service request.
Neither does it provide a mechanism for the NF Service Consumer to
authenticate the NF Service Producer.

In this clause, CCAs are described generally for both NF-NRF communication
and NF-NF communication.


13.3.8.2 Client credentials assertion

CCAs shall be JSON Web Tokens as described in RFC 7519 [44] and are secured
with digital signatures based on JSON Web Signature (JWS) as described in
RFC 7515 [45].

The CCA shall include:

  -  the NF instance ID of the NF Service Consumer (subject);

-  A timestamp (iat) and an expiration time (exp), and

-  The NF type of the expected audience (audience), i.e. the type "NRF"
and/or the NF type of the NF Service Producer.

The NF Service Consumer shall digitally sign the generated CCA based on its
private key as described in RFC 7515 [45]. The signed CCA shall include one
of the following fields:

-  the X.509 URL (x5u) to refer to a resource for the X.509 public key
certificate or certificate chain used for signing the client authentication
assertion, or

-  the X.509 Certificate Chain (x5c) include the X.509 public key
certificate or certificate chain used for signing the client authentication
assertion.


13.3.8.3 Verification of Client credentials assertion

The verification of the CCA shall be performed by the receiving node, i.e.,
NRF or NF Service Producer in the following way:

   - It validates the signature of the JWS as described in RFC 7515 [45].

   - It validates the timestamp (iat) and/or the expiration time (exp) as
     specified in RFC 7519 [44].

If the receiving node is the NRF, the NRF validates the timestamp (iat) and
the expiration time (exp).

If the receiving node is the NF Service Producer, the NF Service Producer
validates the expiration time and it may validate the timestamp.

   - It checks that the audience claim in the the CCA matches its own type.

   - It verifies that the NF instance ID of the NFc in the CCA matches the
     NF instance ID in the public key certificate used for signing the CCA.


13.4 Authorization of NF service access


13.4.1 OAuth 2.0 based authorization of Network Function service access


13.4.1.0 General

The authorization framework described in clause 13.4.1 allows NF Service
Producers to authorize the requests from NF Service requestors.

The authorization framework uses the OAuth 2.0 framework as specified in
RFC 6749 [43]. Grants shall be of the type Client Credentials Grant, as
described in clause 4.4 of RFC 6749 [43]. Access tokens shall be JSON Web
Tokens as described in RFC 7519 [44] and are secured with digital
signatures or Message Authentication Codes (MAC) based on JSON Web
Signature (JWS) as described in RFC 7515 [45].

NOTE 1a: Securing the access token using Message Authentication Codes (MAC)
based on JSON Web Signature (JWS) as described in RFC 7515 [45] requires a
pairwise pre-shared symmetric key between the NRF and the NF Service
Producer. The provisioning of such pre-shared symmetric key is outside the
scope of this document.

The basic extent provided by the authorization token is at service level
(i.e. the "scope" claim includes allowed services per NF type). Depending
on the NF Service Producer configuration, higher level of granularity for
the authorization token can be defined adding "additional scope"
information within the token e.g. to authorize specific service operations
and/or resources/data sets within service operations per NF Service
Consumer type.

NOTE 1: The additional scope(s) included within the access token add
additional security checks at the NF Service Producer that authorizes the
services operations, resources and NF Service Consumer type related to the
additional scope(s).

The authorization framework described in clause 13.4.1 is mandatory to
support for NRF and NF.


13.4.1.1 Service access authorization within the PLMN


13.4.1.1.1  OAuth 2.0 roles

OAuth 2.0 roles, as defined in clause 1.1 of RFC 6749 [43], are as follows:

a. The Network Repository Function (NRF) shall be the OAuth 2.0
Authorization server.

b. The NF Service Consumer shall be the OAuth 2.0 client.

c. The NF Service Producer shall be the OAuth 2.0 resource server.



OAuth 2.0 client (NF Service Consumer) registration with the OAuth 2.0
authorization server (NRF)

The NF Service registration procedure, as defined in clause 4.17.1 of TS
23.502 [8], may be used to register the OAuth 2.0 client (NF Service
Consumer) with the OAuth 2.0 Authorization server (NRF), as described in
clause 2.0 of RFC 6749 [43]. The client id, used during OAuth 2.0
registration, shall be the NF Instance Id of the NF.

A Network Function that does not implement this option shall be able to get
an access token from the NRF as long as the NRF is able to authenticate and
authorize the Network Function during the NF access token get service
request.

OAuth 2.0 resource server (NF Service Producer) registration with the OAuth
2.0 authorization server (NRF)

The NF Service registration procedure, as defined in clause 4.17.1 of TS
23.502 [8], shall be used to register the OAuth 2.0 resource server (NF
Service Producer) with the OAuth 2.0 Authorization server (NRF). The NF
Service Producer, as part of its NF profile, may include "additional scope"
information related to the allowed service operations and resources per NF
Service Consumer type.

[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.1-1b NF Service Producer registers in NRF

1) The NF Service Producer registers as OAuth 2.0 resource server in the
NRF. The NF profile configuration data of the NF Service Producer may
include the "additional scope". The "additional scope" information
indicates the resources and the actions (service operations) that are
allowed on these resources for the NF Service Consumer. These resources may
be per NF type of the NF Service Consumer or per NF instance ID of the NF
Service Consumer.

2-3) After storing the NF Profile, NRF responds successfully.


13.4.1.1.2  Service Request Process

The complete service request is a two-step process including requesting an
access token by NF Service Consumer (Step 1, i.e. 1a or 1b), and then
verification of the access token by NF Service Producer (Step 2).

NOTE: The service request process regarding the enabler for network
automation is specified in Annex X.

Step 1: Access token request

Pre-requisite:

- The NF Service consumer (OAuth2.0 client) is registered with the NRF
(Authorization Server).

- The NF Service Producer (OAuth2.0 resource server) is registered with the
NRF (Authorization Server) with "additional scope" information per NF type.

- The NRF and NF Service Producer share the required credentials.

- The NRF and NF have mutually authenticated each other.

1a. Access token request for accessing services of NF Service Producers of
a specific NF type

The following procedure describes how the NF Service Consumer obtains an
access token before service access to NF Service Producers of a specific NF
type.



[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.1.2-1: NF Service Consumer obtaining access token before NF
Service access

1. The NF Service Consumer shall request an access token from the NRF in
the same PLMN using the Nnrf_AccessToken_Get request operation. The message
shall include the NF Instance Id(s) of the NF Service Consumer, the
requested "scope" including the expected NF Service name(s) and optionally
"additional scope" information (i.e. requested resources and requested
actions (service operations) on the resources), NF type of the expected NF
Service Producer instance and NF Service Consumer. The NF Service Consumer
may also include a list of NSSAIs or list of NSI IDs for the expected NF
Service Producer instances.

       The message may include the NF Set ID of the expected NF Service
       Producer instances.

       The message may include a list of S-NSSAIs of the NF Service
       Consumer.




2. The NRF may verify that the input parameters (e.g., NF type) in the
access token request match with the corresponding ones in the public key
certificate of the NF Service Consumer or those in the NF profile of the NF
Service Consumer. The NRF checks whether the NF Service Consumer is
authorized to access the requested service(s). If the NF Service Consumer
is authorized, the NRF shall then generate an access token with appropriate
claims included. The NRF shall digitally sign the generated access token
based on a shared secret or private key as described in RFC 7515 [45]. If
the NF Service Consumer is not authorized, the NRF shall not issue an
access token to the NF Service Consumer.

The claims in the token shall include the NF Instance Id of NRF (issuer),
NF Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer (subject), NF type of the NF
Service Producer (audience), expected service name(s), (scope), expiration
time (expiration) and optionally "additional scope" information (allowed
resources and allowed actions (service operations) on the resources). The
claims may include a list of NSSAIs or NSI IDs for the expected NF Service
Producer instances. The claims may include the NF Set ID of the expected NF
Service Producer instances.

3. If the authorization is successful, the NRF shall send access token to
the NF Service Consumer in the Nnrf_AccessToken_Get response operation,
otherwise it shall reply based on Oauth 2.0 error response defined in RFC
6749 [43]. The other parameters (e.g., the expiration time, allowed scope)
sent by NRF in addition to the access token are described in TS 29.510
[68].

The NF Service Consumer may store the received token(s). Stored tokens may
be re-used for accessing service(s) from NF Service Producer NF type listed
in claims (scope, audience) during their validity time.



1b. Access token request for accessing services of a specific NF Service
Producer instance / NF Service Producer service instance

The following steps describes how the NF Service Consumer obtains an access
token before service access to a specific NF Service Producer instance / NF
Service Producer service instance. 1. The NF Service Consumer shall request
an access token from the NRF for a specific NF Service Producer instance /
NF Service Producer service instance. The request shall include the NF
Instance Id(s) of the requested NF Service Producer, the expected NF
Service name, optionally "additional scope" information (allowed resources
and allowed actions (service operations) on the resources) and NF Instance
Id of the NF Service Consumer.

2.The NRF checks whether the NF Service Consumer is authorized to use the
requested NF Service Producer instance/NF Service Producer service
instance, and then proceeds to generate an access token with the
appropriate claims included. If the NF Service Consumer is not authorized,
the NRF shall not issue an access token to the NF Service Consumer.

The claims in the token shall include the NF Instance Id of NRF (issuer),
NF Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer (subject), NF Instance Id or
several NF Instance Id(s) of the requested NF Service Producer (audience),
expected service name(s) (scope), optionally "additional scope" information
(allowed resources and allowed actions (service operations) on the
resources), and expiration time (expiration).

3. The token shall be included in the Nnrf_AccessToken_Get response sent to
the NF Service Consumer. The NF Service Consumer may store the received
token(s). Stored tokens may be re-used for accessing service(s) from NF
Instance Id or several NF Instance Id(s) of the requested NF Service
Producer instance listed in claims (scope, audience) during their validity
time.

Step 2: Service access request based on token verification

The following figure and procedure describe how authorization is performed
during Service request of the NF Service Consumer. Prior to the request,
the NF Service Consumer may perform Nnrf_NFDiscovery_Request operation with
the requested additional scopes to select a suitable NF Service Producer
(resource server) which is able to authorize the Service Access request.

[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.1.2-2: NF Service Consumer requesting service access with an
access token

Pre-requisite: The NF Service Consumer is in possession of a valid access
token before requesting service access from the NF Service Producer.

1. The NF Service Consumer requests service from the NF Service Producer.
The NF Service Consumer shall include the access token.

The NF Service Consumer and NF Service Producer shall authenticate each
other following clause 13.3.

2. The NF Service Producer shall verify the token as follows:

 - The NF Service Producer ensures the integrity of the token by verifying
the signature using NRFs public key or checking the MAC value using the
shared secret. If integrity check is successful, the NF Service Producer
shall verify the claims in the token as follows:

NOTE: Void.

-  It checks that the audience claim in the access token matches its own
identity or the type of NF Service Producer. If a list of NSSAIs or list of
NSI IDs is present, the NF Service Producer shall check that it serves the
corresponding slice(s).

-  If an NF Set ID present, the NF Service Producer shall check the NF Set
ID in the claim matches its own NF Set ID.

-  If scope is present, it checks that the scope matches the requested
service operation.

-  If the access token contains "additional scope" information (i.e.
allowed resources and allowed actions (service operations) on the
resources), it checks that the additional scope matches the requested
service operation.

-  It checks that the access token has not expired by verifying the
expiration time in the access token against the current data/time.

-  If the CCA is present in the service request, it may verify the CCA as
specified in clause 13.3.8.3 and that the subject claim (i.e., the NF
Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer) in the access token matches the
subject claim in the CCA.

3. If the verification is successful, the NF Service Producer shall execute
the requested service and responds back to the NF Service Consumer.
Otherwise it shall reply based on Oauth 2.0 error response defined in RFC
6749 [43].


13.4.1.2 Service access authorization in roaming scenarios


13.4.1.2.1  OAuth 2.0 roles

In the roaming scenario, OAuth 2.0 roles are as follows:

a. The visiting Network Repository Function (vNRF) shall be the OAuth 2.0
Authorization server for vPLMN and authenticates the NF Service Consumer.

b. The home Network Repository Function (hNRF) shall be OAuth 2.0
Authorization server for hPLMN and generates the access token.

c. The NF Service Consumer in the visiting PLMN shall be the OAuth 2.0
client.

d. The NF Service Producer in the home PLMN shall be the OAuth 2.0 resource
server.

OAuth 2.0 client (NF Service Consumer) registration with the OAuth 2.0
authorization server (NRF) in the vPLMN

Same as in the non-roaming scenario in 13.4.1.1.

OAuth 2.0 resource server (NF Service Producer) registration with the OAuth
2.0 authorization server (NRF) in the hPLMN

Same as in the non-roaming scenario in 13.4.1.1.


13.4.1.2.2  Service Request Process

The complete service request is two-step process including requesting an
access token by NF Service Consumer (Step 1, i.e. 1a or 1b), and then
verification of the access token by NF Service Consumer (Step 2).



Step 1: Access token request

Pre-requisite:

- The NF Service consumer (OAuth2.0 client) is registered with the vNRF
(Authorization Server in the vPLMN).

- The hNRF and NF Service Producer share the required credentials.
Additionally, the NF Service Producer (OAuth2.0 resource server) is
registered with the hNRF (Authorization Server in the hPLMN) with
"additional scope" information per NF type.

 - The two NRFs are implicitly authenticated via N32 mutual authentication
of SEPPs.

NOTE:  vSEPP to hSEPP communication is secured via N32. Only transitive
trust between vNRF and hNRF can be achieved: The vNRF and vSEPP mutually
authenticate, the vSEPP and hSEPP mutually authenticate, and the hSEPP and
hNRF mutually authenticate. Hence, vNRF and hNRF can only implicitly
authenticate each other.



- The NRF in the serving PLMN (vNRF) has authenticated the NF Service
Consumer.

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, the NF Service Consumer and the vNRF are located in the
SNPN while the hNRF is located in the Credentials Holder.

1a. Access token request for accessing services of NF Service Producers of
a specific NF type

The following procedure describes how the NF Service Consumer obtains an
access token for NF Service Producers of a specific NF type for use in the
roaming scenario.

[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.2.2-1: NF Service Consumer obtaining access token before NF
Service access (roaming)

1. The NF Service Consumer shall invoke Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Request (NF
Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer, the requested "scope" including the
 expected NF Service Name (s) and optionally "additional scope" information
(i.e. requested resources and requested actions (service operations) on the
resources), NF Type of the expected NF Service Producer instance, NF type
of the NF Service Consumer, home and serving PLMN IDs, optionally list of
NSSAIs or list of NSI IDs for the expected NF Service Producer instances,
optionally NF Set ID of the expected NF Service Producer) from NRF in the
same PLMN.

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, the SNPN ID of the serving SNPN is included instead of the
serving PLMN ID and the SNPN ID or the PLMN ID of the Credentials Holder is
included instead of the home PLMN ID.

2. The NRF in serving PLMN shall identify the NRF in home PLMN (hNRF) based
on the home PLMN ID, and request an access token from hNRF as described in
clause 4.17.5 of TS 23.502 [8]. The vNRF shall forward the parameters it
obtained from the NF Service Consumer, including NF Service Consumer type,
to the hNRF.

3. The hNRF checks whether the NF Service Consumer is authorized to access
the requested service(s). If the NF Service Consumer is authorized, the
hNRF shall generate an access token with appropriate claims included as
defined in clause 13.4.1.1. The hNRF shall digitally sign the generated
access token based on a shared secret or private key as described in RFC
7515 [45]. If the NF service consumer is not authorized, the hNRF shall not
issue an access token to the NF Service Consumer.

The claims in the token shall include the NF Instance Id of NRF (issuer),
NF Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer appended with its PLMN ID
(subject), NF type of the NF Service Producer appended with its PLMN ID
(audience), expected services name(s), (scope) and expiration time
(expiration), and optionally "additional scope" information (allowed
resources and allowed actions (service operations) on the resources). The
claims may include a list of NSSAIs or NSI IDs for the expected NF Service
Producer instances. The claims may include the NF Set ID of the expected NF
Service Producer instances.

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, the SNPN ID of the serving SNPN is included instead of the
NF Service Consumer's PLMN ID and the SNPN ID or the PLMN ID of the
Credentials Holder is included instead of the NF Service Producer's PLMN
ID.

4. If the authorization is successful, the access token shall be included
in Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Response message to the vNRF. Otherwise it shall
reply based on Oauth 2.0 error response defined in RFC 6749 [43].

5. The vNRF shall forward the Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Response or error
message to the NF Service Consumer. The NF Service Consumer may store the
received token(s). Stored tokens may be re-used for accessing service(s)
from NF Service Producer NF type listed in claims (scope, audience) during
their validity time. The other parameters (e.g., the expiration time,
allowed scope) sent by NRF in addition to the access token are described in
TS 29.510 [68].



1b. Obtain access token for accessing services of a specific NF Service
Producer instance / NF Service Producer service instance

The following steps describes how the NF Service Consumer obtains an access
token before service access to a specific NF Service Producer instance / NF
Service Producer service instance.

1. The NF Service Consumer shall request an access token from the NRF for a
specific NF Service Producer instance / NF Service Producer service
instance. The request shall include the NF Instance Id of the requested NF
Service Producer, appended with its PLMN ID, the expected NF service name
and NF Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer, appended with its PLMN ID.

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, the SNPN ID of the serving SNPN is included instead of the
NF Service Consumer's PLMN ID and the SNPN ID or the PLMN ID of the
Credentials Holder is included instead of the NF Service Producer's PLMN
ID.

2. The NRF in the visiting PLMN shall forward the request to the NRF in the
home PLMN.

3. The NRF in the home PLMN checks whether the NF Service Consumer is
authorized to use the requested NF Service Producer instance/NF Service
Producer service instance and shall then proceed to generate an access
token with the appropriate claims included. If the NF Service Consumer is
not authorized, the NRF in the home PLMN shall not issue an access token to
the NF Service Consumer.

The claims in the token shall include the NF Instance Id of NRF (issuer),
NF Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer appended with its PLMN ID
(subject), NF Instance Id of the requested NF Service Producer appended
with its PLMN ID (audience), expected service name(s) (scope) and
expiration time (expiration).

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, the SNPN ID of the serving SNPN is included instead of the
NF Service Consumer's PLMN ID and the SNPN ID or the PLMN ID of the
Credentials Holder is included instead of the NF Service Producer's PLMN
ID.

4. The token shall be included in the Nnrf_AccessToken_Get response sent to
the NRF in the visiting PLMN.

5. The NRF in the visiting PLMN shall forward the Nnrf_AccessToken_Get
response message to the NF Service Consumer. The NF Service Consumer may
store the received token(s). Stored tokens may be re-used for accessing
service(s) from NF Instance Id or several NF Instance Id(s) of the
requested NF Service Producer listed in claims (scope, audience) during
their validity time.

Step 2: Service access request based on token verification

In addition to the steps described in the non-roaming scenario in 13.4.1.1,
the NF Service Producer shall verify that the PLMN-ID contained in the API
request is equal to the one inside the access token.

[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.2.2-2: NF Service Consumer requesting service access with an
access token in roaming case

The NF Service Producer shall check that the home PLMN ID of audience claim
in the access token matches its own PLMN identity.

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, the NF Service Producer verifies the SNPN ID of the serving
SNPN contained in the API request instead of the PLMN-ID, and the SNPN ID
or the PLMN ID of the Credentials Holder instead of the home PLMN ID.

The pSEPP shall check that the serving PLMN ID of subject claim in the
access token matches the remote PLMN ID corresponding to the N32-f context
Id in the N32 message.


13.4.1.3 Service access authorization in indirect communication scenarios


13.4.1.3.1  Authorization for indirect communication without delegated
         discovery procedure


13.4.1.3.1.1  With mutual authentication between NF Service Consumer and
         NRF at the transport layer

This clause covers the scenario where the NF Service Consumer and the NRF
are connected over a mutually authenticated TLS connection.

[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.3.1.1-1: Authorization and service invocation procedure, for
indirect communication without delegated discovery, with mutual
authentication between NF and NRF at the transport layer

Discovery of the NF Service Producer:

0. Optionally, the NF Service Consumer may discover the NF Service Producer
before requesting authorization to invoke the services of the NF Service
Producer. E.g. if the NF Service Consumer has not yet discovered the NF
Service Producer, then it may run the discovery procedure.

NF Service Consumer authorization:

1-2.

After mutual authentication between NF Service Consumer and NRF at the
transport layer, the NF Service Consumer and NRF perform the "Access token
request before service access" procedure as described in clause 13.4.1.1.
If the NF Service Consumer has already discovered the NF Service Producer,
it can also perform the "Access token request for a specific NF Service
Producer/NF Service Producer instance" procedure as described in clause
13.4.1.1.

Service request:

The NF Service Consumer, SCP, NRF and NF Service Producer perform the
procedure "Indirect Communication without delegated discovery Procedure"
described in clause 4.17.11 of TS 23.502 [8]. The following steps describe
how the access token received from steps 1 and 2 is used in this procedure.

3. If no cached data is available, the NF Service Consumer discovers the NF
Service Producer via the SCP.

4. The NF Service Consumer sends a service request for the specific service
to the SCP. The service request includes the access token as received in
step 2, and may include the NF Service Consumer CCA as defined in clause
13.3.8.

If the CCA is included, the NF type of the expected audience in the CCA
shall contain "NF Service Producer".

If the NF Service Consumer allows reselection of a target NF Service
Producer by the SCP, the expected audience in the CCA shall also contain NF
type "NRF".

NOTE:  In the same deployment, the NF Service Consumer can delegate the
reselection of the target NF Service Producer to the SCP for some requests,
and not for other requests.

5. The SCP selects a NF Service Producer instance, performs the API root
modifications and forwards the received request to the selected NF Service
Producer instance. The request contains the access token and may contain
the NF Service Consumer CCA if received in step 4.

6. To authorize the access, the NF Service Producer authenticates the
service consumer NF using one of the methods described in clause 13.3.2.2
and if successful, it validates the access token as described in clause
13.4.1.1 by verifying the signature and checking if the requested service
is part of the token's scope.

7.   If the checks in step 6 are successful, the NF Service Producer
processes the service request and provides a service response.

8. The SCP performs reverse API root modifications and forwards the service
response.





13.4.1.3.1.2  Without mutual authentication between NF and NRF at the
         transport layer

When there is no  mutual authentication between NF Service Consumer and NRF
at the transport layer, the NF Service Consumer performs the following
procedure to obtain the access token from NRF and uses it for service
access at the NF Service Producer. In this clause, the authentication of NF
Service Consumer by the NRF and by the NF Service Producer is based on any
of the methods described in clauses 13.3.1.2 and 13.3.2.2.



[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.3.1.2-1: Authorization and service invocation procedure, for
indirect communication without delegated discovery, without mutual
authentication between NF and NRF at the transport layer

0. Optionally, the NF Service Consumer may discover the NF Service Producer
before requesting authorization to invoke the services of the NF Service
Producer.

1.   The NF Service Consumer sends an access token request
(Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Request) to the SCP with parameters as specified in
13.4.1.1.  The access token request may additionally include the NF Service
Consumer CCA as defined in clause 13.3.8.

If the CCA is included, the NF type of the expected audience in CCA shall
contain "NRF".

2.   The SCP forwards the access token request (Nnrf_AccessToken_Get
Request) to the NRF. The request may include the NF Service Consumer CCA if
received in step 1.

3. The NRF authenticates the service consumer NF using one of the methods
described in clause 13.3.1.2. If the NF Service Consumer authentication is
successful and the NF Service Consumer is authorized based on the NRF
policy, the NRF issues an access token as described in clause 13.4.1.1. The
NRF uses the NF Service Consumer NF Instance ID as the subject of the
access token.

4.   The NRF sends the access token to the SCP in an access token response
(Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Response).

5. The SCP forwards the access token response (Nnrf_AccessToken_Get
Response) to the NF Service Consumer, including the access token.

6.   The NF Service Consumer sends the service request to the SCP. The
service request includes the access token received in Step 5 and may
include the NF Service Consumer CCA.

If the CCA is included, the NF type of the expected audience in CCA shall
contain "NF Service Producer".

If the NF Service Consumer allows reselection of a target NF Service
Producer by the SCP, the expected audience in the CCA shall also contain NF
type "NRF".

NOTE:  In the same deployment, the NF Service Consumer can delegate the
reselection of the target NF Service Producer to the SCP for some requests,
and not for other requests.

7.  The SCP forwards the service request to the NF Service Producer. The
service request includes the access token received in step 6, and may
include the NF Service Consumer CCA if received in step 6.

8. The NF Service Producer authenticates the NF Service Consumer by one of
the methods described in clause 13.3.2.2 and if successful, it validates
the access token as described in clause 13.4.1.1.

9. If the validation of the access token is successful, the NF Service
Producer sends the service response to the SCP.

10.  The SCP forwards the service response to the NF Service Consumer.


13.4.1.3.2  Authorization for indirect communication with delegated
         discovery procedure

This clause covers the scenario where the NF Service Consumer use the SCP
to discover and select the NF Service Producer instance that can process
the service request.



[pic]

Figure 13.4.1.3.2-1: Authorization and service invocation procedure, for
indirect communication with delegated discovery

1. The NF Service Consumer sends a service request to the SCP. The service
request may include the NF Service Consumer's CCA as defined in clause
13.3.8.The NF Service Consumer may include an access token in the service
request if it has received an access token in a previous service response.
If a previously received access token has expired, the NF Service Consumer
may include discovery parameters as specified in TS 29.500 [74] clause
5.2.3.2.7 in the service request.

If the CCA is included, the NF type of the expected audience in CCA shall
contain "NRF" and "NF Service Producer".

2. The SCP may perform a service discovery with the NRF. If NF Service
Consumer has included an access token in step 1, or if the SCP has a cached
granted access token, then SCP may reuse the access token and proceeds to
step 6.

3.   The SCP sends an access token request (Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Request)
to the NRF. The access token request includes parameters as defined in
clause 13.4.1.1. The access token request may include the NF Service
Consumer's CCA if received in Step 1.

4. The NRF authenticates the NF Service Consumer using one of the methods
described in clause 13.3.1.2. If NF Service Consumer authentication is
successful and the NF Service Consumer is authorized based on the NRF
policy, the NRF issues an access token as described in clause 13.4.1.1. The
NRF uses the NF Service Consumer instance ID as the subject of the access
token.

5. The NRF sends the access token to the SCP in an access token response
(Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Response).

6. The SCP sends the service request to the NF Service Producer. The
service request includes an access token (i.e., received in Step 1,
received in Step 5, or previously cached), and may include the NF Service
Consumer's CCA if received in Step 1.

7. The NF Service Producer authenticates the NF Service Consumer by one of
the methods described in clause 13.3.2.2 and if successful, it validates
the access token as described in clause 13.4.1.1.

8. If the validation of the access token is successful, the NF Service
Producer sends the service response to the SCP.

9. The SCP forwards the service response to the NF Service Consumer. The
SCP may include the access token in the service response to NF Service
Consumer for possible re-use in subsequent service requests.


13.5 Security capability negotiation between SEPPs

The security capability negotiation over N32-c allows the SEPPs to
negotiate which security mechanism to use for protecting NF service-related
signalling over N32-f. There shall be an agreed security mechanism between
a pair of SEPPs before conveying NF service-related signalling over N32-f.

When a SEPP notices that it does not have an agreed security mechanism for
N32-f protection with a peer SEPP or if the security capabilities of the
SEPP have been updated, the SEPP shall perform security capability
negotiation with the peer SEPP over N32-c in order to determine, which
security mechanism to use for protecting NF service-related signalling over
N32-f. Certificate based authentication shall follow the profiles given in
3GPP TS 33.210 [3], clause 6.2.

A mutually authenticated TLS connection as defined in clause 13.1 shall be
used for protecting security capability negotiation over N32-c. The TLS
connection shall provide integrity, confidentiality and replay protection.

[pic]

Figure 13.5-1 Security capability negotiation

1. The SEPP which initiated the TLS connection shall issue a POST request
to the exchange-capability resource of the responding SEPP including the
initiating SEPPs supported security mechanisms for protecting the NF
service-related signalling over N32-f (see table Table 13.5-1). The
security mechanisms shall be ordered in the initiating SEPPs priority
order.

2. The responding SEPP shall compare the received security capabilities to
its own supported security capabilities and selects, based on its local
policy (e.g. based on whether there are IPX providers on the path between
the SEPPs), a security mechanism, which is supported by both initiating
SEPP and responding SEPP.

3. The responding SEPP shall respond to the initiating SEPP with the
selected security mechanism for protecting the NF service-related
signalling over N32.

If the selected security mechanism is PRINS, the SEPPs shall behave as
specified in clause 13.2.

If the selected security mechanism is TLS, the SEPPs shall behave as
specified in clause 13.1.2, tear down the N32-c connection and forward the
NF service related signalling over N32-f using a TLS connection.

If the selected security mechanism is a mechanism other than the ones
specified in Table 13.5-1, the two SEPPs shall terminate the N32-c TLS
connection.




14 Security related services


14.1 Services provided by AUSF


14.1.1 General

The AUSF provides UE authentication service to the requester NF by
Nausf_UEAuthentication. For AKA based authentication, this operation can be
also used to recover from synchronization failure situations. Clause 14.1.2
describes the Nausf_UEAuthentication service. The service operations listed
here are used in procedures that are described in clause 6 of the present
document and in TS 33.503 [109].

Clause 14.1.3 describes the Nausf_SoRProtection service used in procedures
that are described in clause 6.14 of the present document.

Clause 14.1.4 describes the Nausf_UPUProtection service used in procedures
that are described in clause 6.15 of the present document.

Since AUSF is completely security-related, all service operations are
described in the present document. TS 23.501 [2], clause 7.2.7, only lists
the services and TS 23.502 [8], clause 5.2.10, provides the reference to
the present document.


14.1.2 Nausf_UEAuthentication service


14.1.2.1 Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate service operation

Service operation name: Nausf_UEAuthentication_authenticate.

Description: Authenticate the UE and provides related keying material.

Input, Required: One of the options below.

1. In the initial authentication request: SUPI or SUCI, serving network
name.

2. In the subsequent authentication requests depending on the
authentication method:

a. 5G AKA: Authentication confirmation message with RES* as described in
clause 6.1.3.2 or Synchronization Failure indication and related
information (i.e. RAND/AUTS).

b. EAP-AKA:  EAP packet as described in RFC 4187 [21] and RFC 5448 [12],
and Annex F.

Input, Optional: Disaster Roaming service indication.

Output, Required: One of the options below.

1. Depending on the authentication method:

a. 5G AKA: authentication vector, as described in clause 6.1.3.2 or
Authentication confirmation acknowledge message.

b. EAP-AKA:  EAP packet as described in RFC 4187 [21] and RFC 5448 [12],
and Annex F.

2. Authentication result and if success the master key which are used by
AMF to derive NAS security keys and other security key(s).

Output, Optional: SUPI if the authentication was initiated with SUCI.


14.1.2.2 Nausf_UEAuthentication_deregister service operation

Service operation name: Nausf_UEAuthentication_deregister

Description: Deletion of stale security parameters (KAUSF, SOR counter and
UE parameter update counter) in AUSF. UDM uses this service operation to
request the AUSF to clear the stale security parameters, after the UE has
been successfully (re)authenticated in different AUSF Instance.

Input, Required: SUPI

Input, Optional: None

Output, Required: None

Output, Optional: None


14.1.2.3 Nausf_UEAuthentication_ProseAuthenticate service operation

See TS33.503[109].

Service operation name: Nausf_SoRProtection.

Description: The AUSF calculates the SoR-MAC-IAUSF as specified in the
Annex A.17 of this document using UE specific home key (KAUSF), the
Steering Information List and ACK Indication  received from the requester
NF and delivers the SoR-MAC-IAUSF and CounterSoR to the requester NF. If
the ACK Indication input is set to indicate that the acknowledgement is
requested, then the AUSF shall compute the SoR-XMAC-IUE and return it in
the response.

NOTE:  At reception of Nausf_SoRProtection_Protect request from the UDM,
the AUSF constructs the SOR header, as described in clause 9.11.3.51 of TS
24.501 [35], based on the information received from the requester NF, i.e.
ACK Indication and list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations or
a secured packet (if provided).

Input, Required: Requester ID, SUPI, service name, ACK Indication.

Input, Optional: list of preferred PLMN/access technology combinations or
secured packet or SoR transparent container.

Output, Required: SoR-MAC-IAUSF, CounterSoR or error (counter_wrap).

Output, Optional: SoR-XMAC-IUE (if the ACK Indication input is set to
indicate that the acknowledgement is requested, then the SoR-XMAC-IUE shall
be computed and returned).


14.1.4 Nausf_UPUProtection service

The following table illustrates the security related services for UE
Parameters Update that AUSF provides.

Table 14.1.4-1: NF services for UE Parameters Update provided by AUSF

|Service Name   |Service Operations|Operation Semantics|Example           |
|               |                  |                   |Consumer(s)       |
|Nausf_UPUProtec|Protect           |Request/Response   |UDM               |
|tion           |                  |                   |                  |


Service operation name: Nausf_UPUProtection.

Description: The AUSF calculates the UPU-MAC-IAUSF as specified in the
Annex A.19 of this document using UE specific home key (KAUSF) along with
the UE Parameters Update Data received from the requester NF (see clause
A.19) and delivers the UPU-MAC-IAUSF and CounterUPU to the requester NF. If
the ACK Indication input is present, then the AUSF shall compute the UPU-
XMAC-IUE and return the computed UPU-XMAC-IUE in the response. The details
of the UE Parameters Update Data is specified in TS 24.501 [35].

Input, Required: Requester ID, SUPI, service name, UE Parameters Update
Data.

Input, Optional: ACK Indication.

Output, Required: UPU-MAC-IAUSF, CounterUPU or error (counter_wrap).

Output, Optional: UPU-XMAC-IUE (if the ACK Indication input is present,
then the UPU-XMAC-IUE shall be computed and returned).


14.1.5 Void


14.2 Services provided by UDM


14.2.1 General

UDM provides within Nudm_UEAuthentication service all authentication-
related service operations, which are Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get (clause
14.2.2) , Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation (clause 14.2.3),
Nudm_UEAuthentication_GetProseAv (clause 14.2.4) and
Nudm_UEAuthentication_GetGbaAv (clause 14.2.5).

The complete list of UDM services is defined in TS 23.501 [2], clause
7.2.5, and further refined in TS 23.502 [8], clause 5.2.3.1.


14.2.2 Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get service operation

Service operation name: Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get

Description: Requester NF gets the authentication data from UDM. For AKA
based authentication, this operation can be also used to recover from
synchronization failure situations. If SUCI is included, this service
operation returns the SUPI.

Inputs, Required: SUPI or SUCI, serving network name.

Inputs, Optional: Synchronization Failure indication and related
information (i.e. RAND/AUTS) , Disaster Roaming service indication.

Outputs, Required: Authentication method

Editor's note: How the UDM indicates to the AUSF to run primary
authentication with an external Credentials holder is FFS.

Outputs, Optional: SUPI if SUCI was used as input. Depending on the
authentication method, authentication data (e.g. AKA authentication vector)
for the SUPI. AKMA Indication and Routing indicator, if the subscriber has
an AKMA subscription (see TS 33.535 [91]).


14.2.3 Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation service operation

Service operation name: UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation

Description: Requester NF informs UDM about the result of an authentication
procedure with a UE.

Inputs, Required: SUPI, timestamp of the authentication, the authentication
type (e.g. EAP method or 5G-AKA), and the serving network name.

Inputs, Optional: None.

Outputs, Required: None.

Outputs, Optional: None.


14.2.4 Nudm_UEAuthentication_GetProseAv service operation

See TS33.503[109].


14.2.5 Nudm_UEAuthentication_GetGbaAv service operation

See TS33.220[28], Annex N.


14.3 Services provided by NRF


The complete list of NRF services is defined in TS 23.501 [2], clause
7.2.6, and further refined in TS 23.502 [8], clause 5.2.7.


14.3.2 Nnrf_AccessToken_Get Service Operation

Service Operation name: Nnrf_AccessToken_Get.

Description: NF Service Consumer requests NRF to provide an Access Token.

Inputs, Required: the NF Instance Id of the NF Service Consumer, the
requested "scope" including the expected NF service name(s).

Inputs, Optional: Home and serving PLMN IDs, NF Instance Id(s) of the
requested NF Service Producer, NF type of the expected NF Service Producer
instance and NF Service Consumer, "additional scope" information (i.e.
requested resources and requested actions (service operations) on the
resources), list of NSSAIs or list of NSI IDs for the expected NF Service
Producer instances, NF Set ID of the expected NF Service Producer
instances, list of S-NSSAIs of the NF Service Consumer.

Outputs, Required: Access Token with appropriate claims, where the claims
shall include NF Instance Id of NRF (issuer), NF Instance Id of the NF
Service Consumer potentially appended with its PLMN ID (subject), NF type
of the NF Service Producers or NF Instance Id or several NF Instance Id(s)
of the requested NF Service Producer, potentially appended with PLMN ID
(audience), expected service name (scope), optionally "additional scope"
information (allowed resources and allowed actions (service operations) on
the resources) and expiration time (expiration), may include list of NSSAIs
or NSI IDs for the expected NF Service Producer instances, and may include
the NF Set ID of the expected NF Service Producer instances.

Outputs, Optional: None.


14.4 Services provided by NSSAAF


14.4.1 Nnssaaf_NSSAA services

14.4.1.2 Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Authenticate service operation

Service operation name: Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Authenticate

Description: NF consumer requires the NSSAAF to relay Network Slice
specific authentication messages towards the corresponding AAA-S handling
the Network Slice specific authentication for the requested S-NSSAI (see
clause 16).

Input, Required:

1) In the initial NSSAA requests: EAP ID Response, GPSI, S-NSSAI

2) In subsequent NSSAA requests: EAP message, GPSI, S-NSSAI

Input, Optional: None

Output, Required: EAP message, GPSI, S-NSSAI

Output, Optional: None


14.4.1.3 Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Re-AuthenticationNotification service operation

Service operation name: Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Re-AuthenticationNotification

Description: NSSAAF notifies the NF consumer to trigger a Network Slice
specific reauthentication procedure for a given UE and S-NSSAI.

NOTE:  The AMF is implicitly subscribed to receive Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Re-
authenticationNotification service operation.

Input, Required: GPSI, S-NSSAI

Input, Optional: None

Output, Required: None

Output, Optional: None


14.4.1.4 Nnssaaf_NSSAA_RevocationNotification service operation

Service operation name: Nnssaaf_NSSAA_RevocationNotification

Description: NSSAAF notifies the NF consumer to trigger a Network Slice
specific revocation procedure for a given UE and S-NSSAI.

NOTE:  The AMF is implicitly subscribed to receive
Nnssaaf_NSSAA_RevocationNotification service operation.

Input, Required: GPSI, S-NSSAI

Input, Optional: None

Output, Required: None

Output, Optional: None


14.4.2 Nnssaaf_AIW services


14.4.2.1 General

The following table illustrates the security related services provided by
the NSSAAF for primary authentication in SNPN with Credentials holder using
AAA server (see clause I.2.2.2).

  Table 14.4.2.1-1: NF services for CH using AAA for primary authentication
                             provided by NSSAAF

|Service Name   |Service Operations|Operation Semantics|Example           |
|               |                  |                   |Consumer(s)       |
|Nnssaaf_AIW    |Authenticate      |Request/Response   |AUSF              |



14.4.2.2 Nnssaaf_AIW_Authenticate service operation

Service operation name: Nnssaaf_AIW_Authenticate

Description: The NSSAAF provides Authentication and Authorization service
to the consumer NF by relaying EAP or EAP-TTLS inner method messages
towards a AAA Server and performing related protocol conversion as needed.
Input, Required:

1) In EAP Authentication:

a) In the initial authentication request: SUPI.

b) In subsequent authentication requests: EAP message.

2) In case EAP-TTLS mechanisms are implemented: inner method container.

Input, Optional: None

Output, Required:

1) In EAP authentication: EAP message, authentication result and if success
MSK and SUPI.

2) In case EAP-TTLS mechanisms are implemented: inner method container.

Output, Optional: None




15 Management security for network slices


15.1 General

The creation, modification, and termination of a Network Slice Instance
(NSI) is part of the Management Services provided by the 5G management
systems. A management service is accessed by management service consumers
via standardized service interfaces given in 3GPP TS 28.533 [54]. The
typical service consumers for the above NSI provisioning and NSI
provisioning exposure are operators and vertical industry respecitively, as
described in 3GPP TS 28.531 [55]. These management services are securely
protected through mutual authentication and authorization below.


15.2 Mutual authentication

If a management service consumer resides outside the 3GPP operators trust
domain, mutual authentication shall be performed between the management
service consumer and the management service producer using TLS. TLS shall
follow, the profile given in TS 33.210 [3], clause 6.2 and either 1) the
client and server certificates with the profiles given in 3GPP TS 33.310
[5], clause 6.1.3a or 2) pre-shared keys following RFC 5489for TLS 1.2 and
RFC 8446 [60] for TLS 1.3. The structure of the PKI used for the
certificates is out of scope of the present document. The identities in the
end entity certificates shall be used for authentication and policy checks.
The key distribution of pre-shared keys for TLS is up to the operators
security policy and out of scope of the present document.


15.3 Protection of management interactions between the management service
         consumer and the management service producer

TLS shall be used to provide mutual authentication, integrity protection,
replay protection and confidentiality protection for the interface between
the management service producer and the management service consumer
residing outside the 3GPP operators trust domain. Security profiles for
TLS implementation and usage shall follow the TLS profile given in clause
6.2 of TS 33.210 [3] and the certificate profile given in clause 6.1.3a of
TS 33.310 [5]. The identities in the end entity certificates shall be used
for authentication and policy checks.


15.4 Authorization of management service consumers request

After the mutual authentication, the management service producer determines
whether the management service consumer is authorized to send requests to
the management service producer. The management service producer shall
authorize the requests from the management service consumer using the one
of the following two options: 1) OAuth-based authorization mechanism
following RFC 6749 [43]; 2) based on the local policy of the management
service producer.


16 Security procedures for network slices


16.1 General

This clause specifies the security procedures for network slices.


16.2 Authorization for network slice access

This clause specifies the relationship between primary authentication (as
described in Clause 6.1) and authorization for network slice access (as
described in TS 23.502 [8]) for a UE. Authorization from a home/serving
PLMN is required for a UE to gain access to a network slice, identified by
an S-NSSAI. An authorized S-NSSAI (i.e. allowed S-NSSAI) shall be granted
to a UE only after the UE has completed successfully primary
authentication. At the end of the primary authentication, the AMF and UE
may receive a list of allowed S-NSSAI, which the UE is authorized to
access.

For certain S-NSSAIs, additional Network Slice Specific Authentication and
Authorization (NSSAA) is required. This clause in addition specifies the
pre-requisite for an NSSAA procedure that is described in clause 16.3, with
reference to the following figure 16.2-1.



[pic]

Figure 16.2-1: Relationship between primary authentication and NSSAA

1. UE sends a Registration Request with a list of S-NSSAIs. UE shall not
include those S-NSSAIs for which NSSAA procedures are ongoing, regardless
of access types (c.f. TS 23.501[2], clause 5.15.5.2.1 and TS 23.502[8],
clause 4.2.2.2.2).

2. For an initial Registration Request, the AMF/SEAF shall invoke Primary
authentication as described in clause 6.1.2 of the present document. For a
subsequent Registration Request, the Primary authentication may be skipped
if the UE has already been authenticated and the AMF has valid security
context.

3. AMF shall determine whether NSSAA is required for each of S-NSSAIs,
based on information stored locally or from UDM. For example, the NSSAA for
an S-NSSAI may be omitted

1) if it is not required based on the subscription information,

2) if UE has previously performed NSSAA successfully, regardless of access
type and the result is still valid, or

3) NSSAA for UE is ongoing

4. AMF sends the Registration Accept message to the UE (c.f. TS 23.501[2],
clause 5.15.5.2.1 and TS 23.502[8], clause 4.2.2.2.2, step 21). Optionally
UE sends a Registration Complete.

5. The EAP based NSSAA procedure for each S-NSSAI if required, as
determined in step 3, is executed in this step.

6. Based on the results of step 5, AMF sends UE Configuration Update to
update the requested S-NSSAI status based on the NSSAA results.

The procedure for step 5, i.e., the NSSAA procedure is specified in clause
16.3.


16.3 Network slice specific authentication and authorization

This clause specifies the optional-to-use NSSAA between a UE and an AAA
server (AAA-S) which may be owned by an external 3rd party enterprise.
NSSAA uses a User ID and credentials, different from the 3GPP subscription
credentials (e.g. SUPI and credentials used for PLMN access) and takes
place after the primary authentication.

The EAP framework specified in RFC 3748 [27] shall be used for NSSAA
between the UE and the AAA server. The SEAF/AMF shall perform the role of
the EAP Authenticator and communicates with the AAA-S via the NSSAAF. The
NSSAAF undertakes any AAA protocol interworking with the AAA-S. Multiple
EAP methods are possible for NSSAA. If the AAA-S belongs to a third party
the NSSAAF contacts the AAA-S via a AAA-P. The NSSAAF and the AAA-P may be
co-located.

To protect privacy of the EAP ID used for the EAP based NSSAA, a privacy-
protection capable EAP method is recommended, if privacy protection is
required.


The steps involved in NSSAA are described below.

[pic]

Figure 16.3-1: NSSAA procedure

1. For S-NSSAIs that are requiring NSSAA, based on change of subscription
information, or triggered by the AAA-S, the AMF may trigger the start of
the NSSAA procedure.

   If NSSAA is triggered as a result of Registration procedure, the AMF may
determine, based on UE Context in the AMF, that for some or all S-NSSAI(s)
subject to NSSAA, the UE has already been authenticated following a
Registration procedure on a first access. Depending on NSSAA result (e.g.
success/failure) from the previous Registration, the AMF may decide, based
on Network policies, to skip NSSAA for these S-NSSAIs during the
Registration on a second access.

   If the NSSAA procedure corresponds to a re-authentication and re-
authorization procedure triggered as a result of AAA Server-triggered UE re-
authentication and re-authorization for one or more S-NSSAIs, as described
in clause 16.4, or triggered by the AMF based on operator policy or a
subscription change and if S-NSSAIs that are requiring Network Slice-
Specific Authentication and Authorization are included in the Allowed NSSAI
for each Access Type, the AMF selects an Access Type to be used to perform
the NSSAA procedure based on network policies.

2. The AMF may request the UE User ID for EAP authentication (EAP ID) for
the S-NSSAI in a NAS MM Transport message including the S-NSSAI.

3. The UE provides the EAP ID for the S-NSSAI alongside the S-NSSAI in an
NAS MM Transport message towards the AMF.

4. The AMF sends the EAP ID to the NSSAAF which provides interface with the
AAA, in an Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Authenticate Request (EAP ID Response, GPSI, S-
NSSAI).

5. If the AAA-P is present (e.g. because the AAA-S belongs to a third party
and the operator deploys a proxy towards third parties), the NSSAAF
forwards the EAP ID Response message to the AAA-P, otherwise the NSSAAF
forwards the message directly to the AAA-S. NSSAAF routes to the AAA-S
based on the S-NSSAI. The NSSAAF/AAA-P forwards the EAP Identity message to
the AAA-S together with S-NSSAI and GPSI. The AAA-S stores the GPSI to
create an association with the EAP ID in the EAP ID response message so the
AAA-S can later use it to revoke authorisation or to trigger
reauthentication. The AAA-S uses the EAP-ID and S-NSSAI to identify for
which UE and slice authorisation is requested.

NOTE : If the AAA-S belongs to the 3rd party, the NSSAAF optionally maps
the S-NSSAI to External Network Slice Information (ENSI), and forwards the
EAP Identity message to the AAA-S together with ENSI and GPSI. In this
case, the AAA-S uses the EAP-ID and ENSI to identify the UE for which slice
authorisation is requested.

6 -11. EAP-messages are exchanged with the UE. One or more than one
iterations of these steps may occur.

12.  EAP authentication completes. An EAP-Success/Failure message is
delivered to the NSSAAF/AAA-P along with GPSI and S-NSSAI/ENSI.

13.  The NSSAAF sends the Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Authenticate Response (EAP-
Success/Failure, S-NSSAI, GPSI) to the AMF.

14.  The AMF transmits a NAS MM Transport message (EAP-Success/Failure) to
the UE.

15. Based on the result of Slice specific authentication (EAP-
Success/Failure), if a new Allowed NSSAI or new Rejected NSSAIs needs to be
delivered to the UE, or if the AMF re-allocation is required, the AMF
initiates the UE Configuration Update procedure, for each Access Type, as
described in clause4.2.4.2 of TS 23.502 [8].

If the NSSAA procedure can not be completed (e.g. due to server error or UE
becoming unreachable), the AMF sets the status of the corresponding S-NSSAI
subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization in the
UE context as defined in  TS 29.526 [96], so that an NSSAA is executed next
time the UE requests to register with the S-NSSAI.


16.4 AAA Server triggered Network Slice-Specific Re-authentication and Re-
         authorization procedure



[pic]

Figure 16.4-1: AAA Server initiated Network Slice-Specific Re-
authentication and Re-authorization procedure

0. The UE is registered in 5GC via an AMF. The AMF ID is stored in the UDM.


1. The AAA-S requests the re-authentication and re-authorization for the
Network Slice specified by the S-NSSAI/ENSI in the Re-Auth Request message,
for the UE identified by the GPSI in this message. This message is sent to
an AAA-P, if the AAA-P is used (e.g. the AAA Server belongs to a third
party), otherwise it may be sent directly to the NSSAAF. If an AAA-P is
present, the AAA-P relays the Reauthentication Request to the NSSAAF.

2. The NSSAAF checks whether the AAA-S is authorized to request the re-
authentication and re-authorization by checking the local configuration of
AAA-S address per S-NSSAI. If success,the NSSAAF requests UDM for the AMF
serving the UE using the Nudm_UECM_Get (GPSI, AMF Registration) service
operation. The UDM provides the NSSAAF with the AMF ID of the AMF serving
the UE.

3. The NSSAAF provides an acknowledgement to the AAA protocol Re-Auth
Request message. If the AMF is not registered in UDM the procedure is
stopped here.

4. If the AMF is registered in UDM, the NSSAAF requests the relevant AMF to
re-authenticate/re-authorize the S-NSSAI for the UE using the
Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Re-authenticationNotification service operation. The AMF is
implicitly subscribed to receive Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Re-
authenticationNotification service operations. The NSSAAF may discover the
Callback URI for the Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Re-authenticationNotification service
operation exposed by the AMF via the NRF.

The AMF acknowledges the notification of Re-authentication request.

5. If the UE is registered with the S-NSSAI in the Mapping Of Allowed
NSSAI, the AMF triggers the NSSAA procedure defined in clause 16.3 for the
UE identified by the GPSI and the Network Slice identified by the S-NSSAI
received from the NSSAAF.

If the UE is registered but the S-NSSAI is not in the Mapping Of Allowed
NSSAI, the AMF removes any status of the corresponding S-NSSAI subject to
Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization in the UE context
it may have kept, so that an NSSAA is executed next time the UE requests to
register with the S-NSSAI.


16.5 AAA Server triggered Slice-Specific Authorization Revocation



[pic]

Figure 16.5-1: AAA Server-initiated Network Slice-Specific Authorization
Revocation procedure

0. The UE is registered in 5GC via an AMF. The AMF ID is stored in the UDM.


1. The slice specific AAA-S requests the revocation of authorization for
the Network Slice identified by the GPSI in the AAA Protocol Revoke
Authorization Request message. This message is sent to NSSAAF instance
interfacing with AAA-S or AAA-P if it is used.

The AAA-P, if present, relays the request to the NSSAAF.

2. The NSSAAF checks whether the AAA-S is authorized to request the
revocation by checking the local configuration of AAA-S address per S-
NSSAI. If success,the NSSAAF requests UDM for the AMF serving the UE using
the Nudm_UECM_Get (GPSI, AMF Registration) service operation. The UDM
provides the NSSAAF with the AMF ID of the AMF serving the UE.

3. The NSSAAF sends an acknowledgement to the the AAA-S/AAA-P with AAA
Protocol Revoke Authorization Response message. If the AMF is not
registered in UDM the procedure is stopped here.

4. If the AMF is registered in UDM, the NSSAAF request the relevant AMF to
revoke the S-NSSAI authorization for the UE using the
Nnssaaf_NSSAA_RevocationNotification service operation.

The AMF is implicitly subscribed to receive
Nnssaaf_NSSAA_RevocationNotification service operations. The NSSAAF may
discover the Callback URI for the Nnssaaf_NSSAA_RevocationNotification
service operation exposed by the AMF via the NRF.  The AMF acknowledges the
Notification of Revocation request.

    5. The AMF removes any status it may have kept of the corresponding S-
    NSSAI subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and
    Authorisation in the UE context and sends the UE Configuration Update
    message to revoke the S-NSSAI from the current Allowed NSSAI, for any
    Access Type for which NSSAA had been successfully run on this S-NSSAI.
    The AMF provides a new Allowed NSSAI to the UE by removing the S-NSSAI
    for which authorization has been revoked. The AMF provides new rejected
    NSSAIs to the UE including the S-NSSAI for which authorization has been
    revoked. If no S-NSSAI is left in Allowed NSSAI for an access after the
    revocation, and a Default NSSAI exists that requires no NSSAA or for
    which a NSSAA did not previously fail over this access, then the AMF
    may provide a new Allowed NSSAI to the UE containing the Default NSSAI.
    If no S-NSSAI is left in Allowed NSSAI for an access after the
    revocation, and no Default NSSAI can be provided to the UE in the
    Allowed NSSAI or a previous NSSAA failed for the Default NSSAI over
    this access, then the AMF shall execute the Network-initiated
    Deregistration procedure for the access as described in
    subclause4.2.2.3.3 in TS 23.502 [8], and it shall include in the
    explicit De-Registration Request message the list of Rejected S-NSSAIs,
    each of them with the appropriate rejection cause value.


16.6 AF Authorization for network slice quota-usage information
         notification/retrieval


16.6.1 Introduction

This clause specifies the AF Authorization procedures when AF
subscribes/unsubscribes to network slice quota-usage information and when
AF retrieves network slice quota-usage information.


16.6.2 General

If an AF is deployed within the 3GPP operator domain, an S-NSSAI is allowed
to be sent to the AF. The baseline procedure for notifying the AF slice
usage information (e.g. number of UEs and PDU Sessions in the slice
indicated by the S-NSSAI) and the procedure for retrieving slice usage
information by the AF are defined in TS 23.502 [8].

If an AF is deployed outside the 3GPP operator domain, an S-NSSAI is not
allowed to be sent to the AF as required in clasue 5.9.2.3. The procedure
for notifying the AF slice usage information (e.g. number of UEs and PDU
Sessions in the slice indicated by the S-NSSAI) and the procedure for
retrieving slice usage information by the AF are described in clause
16.6.3.


16.6.3 Subscription/unsubscription procedure of NSACF notification service

Editor's Note:  the procedure shall be aligned with SA2.

[pic]

Figure 16.6.3-1: Subscription/unsubscription of NSACF notification
procedure

0. Authentication of AF: AF is authenticated by NRF or authenticated by NEF
based on description in clause 13 or clause 12. A token is generated for AF
after authentication and authorization.

Editors Note: It is FFS how AF outside the 3GPP operator domain is
authorized.

1. To subscribe or unsubscribe for the number of UEs or the number of PDU
Sessions per network slice notification with the NSACF, the AF sends
Nnef_EventExposure_Subscribe/Unsubscribe Request (Event ID, Event Filter,
Event Reporting information) message to the NEF as described in TS 23.502
[8]. The Event Filter parameter shall be ENSI for an AF deployed outside
the 3GPP operator domain. Other parameters are specified in TS 23.502 [8].

2. The NEF confirms with Nnef_ SliceStatusEventExposure
_Subscribe/Unsubscribe Response message to the AF.

    The Event Filter parameter is the mapped ENSI for the AF deployed
  outside the 3GPP operator domain.

3. The NEF checks whether the AF is authorised for the requested
subscription based on the AF token. It needs to check whether the token
claims match the AFs identity and the Event Filter parameter. If
authorised, the NEF may query the NRF to find the NSACF responsible for the
requested S-NSSAI (NEF needs to map to S-NSSAI based on ENSI for the AF
deployed outside the 3GPP operator domain).

4.  The NEF forwards the request to the NSACF with
Nnsacf_SliceEventExposure_Subscribe/Unsubscribe Request (Event ID, Event
Filter, Event Reporting information). The Event Filter parameter shall be
the mapped S-NSSAI for the AF deployed outside the 3GPP operator domain.

5. The NSACF confirms with Nnsacf_SliceEventExposure_Subscribe/Usubscribe
Response message to the NEF as in TS 23.502 [8].

6-7a.  The NSACF triggers a notification towards the AF and sends the
Nnsacf_SliceEvent Exposure_Notify (Event ID, Event Filter, Event Reporting
information) message to the NEF as described in TS 23.502 [8].

7b-9.  The NEF forwards the message to the AF for single NSACF or
aggregates reporting information for multiple NSACFs in the
Nnef_EventExposure_Notify (Event ID, Event Filter, Event Reporting
information) message as described in TS 23.502 [8]. The Event Filter
parameter shall be the mapped ENSI from the S-NSSAI for the AF deployed
outside the 3GPP operator domain.



A.1  KDF interface and input parameter construction


A.1.1  General

All key derivations (including input parameter encoding) for 5GC shall be
performed using the key derivation function (KDF) specified in Annex B.2.0
of TS 33.220 [28].

This clause specifies how to construct the input string, S, and the input
key, KEY, for each distinct use of the KDF. Note that "KEY" is denoted
"Key" in TS 33.220 [28].




A.1.2  FC value allocations

The FC number space used is controlled by TS 33.220 [28], FC values
allocated for the present document are in range of 0x69  0x79, 0x7B  0x7D
and 0x83-0x84.


A.2  KAUSF derivation function

This clause applies to 5G AKA only.

When deriving a KAUSF from CK, IK and the serving network name when
producing authentication vectors, and when the UE computes KAUSF during 5G
AKA, the following parameters shall be used to form the input S to the
KDF:

-  FC =  0x6A;

-  P0 = serving network  name;

-  L0 = length of the serving network name (variable length as specified in
24.501  [35]);

-  P1 = SQN (  AK,

-  L1 = length of SQN ( AK (i.e. 0x00 0x06).

The XOR of the Sequence Number (SQN) and the Anonymity Key (AK) is sent to
the UE as a part of the Authentication Token (AUTN), see TS 33.102. If AK
is not used, AK shall be treated in accordance with TS 33.102, i.e. as
0000.

The serving network name shall be constructed as specified in clause
6.1.1.4.



The input key KEY shall be equal to the concatenation CK || IK of CK and
IK.


A.3  CK' and IK' derivation function

When deriving CK' and IK' then the KDF of TS 33.402 [11] clause A.2 shall
be used with the following exception: the serving network name (specified
in clause 6.1.1.4) shall be used as the value of access network identity
(P0).






A.4  RES* and XRES* derivation function

When deriving RES* from RES, RAND, and serving network name in the UE and
when deriving XRES* from XRES, RAND, and the serving network name in the
ARPF, the following parameters shall be used to form the input S to the
KDF.

-  FC = 0x6B,

-  P0 = serving network name,

-  L0 = length of the serving network name (variable length as specified in
24.501 [35]),

-  P1 = RAND,

-  L1 = length of RAND (i.e. 0x00  0x10),

-  P2 = RES or XRES,

-  L2 = length RES or XRES (i.e. variable length between 0x00 0x04 and 0x00
 0x10).

The input key KEY shall be equal to the concatenation CK || IK of CK and
IK.

The serving network name shall be constructed as specified in clause
6.1.1.4.



The (X)RES* is identified with the 128 least significant bits of the output
of the KDF.


A.5  HRES* and HXRES* derivation function

When deriving HRES* from RES* in the SEAF and when deriving HXRES* from
XRES* in the AUSF the following parameters shall be used to form the input
S to the SHA-256 hashing algorithm:

-  P0 = RAND,

-  P1 = RES* or XRES*,

The input S shall be equal to the concatenation P0||P1 of the P0 and P1.

The H(X)RES* is identified with the 128 least significant bits of the
output of the SHA-256 function.


A.6  KSEAF derivation function

When deriving a KSEAF from KAUSF, the following parameters shall be used to
form the input S to the  KDF:

-  FC = 0x6C,

-  P0 = <serving network name>,

-  L0 = length of <serving network  name>.

The input key KEY shall be KAUSF.

The serving network name shall be constructed as specified in clause
6.1.1.4.

B.1  Introduction

The present annex describes an example of the usage of additional EAP
methods for primary authentication in private networks using the 5G system
as specified in TS 22.261  [7]. It is provided as an example on how the 5G
authentication framework for primary authentication can be applied to EAP
methods other than  EAP-AKA' The additional EAP methods are only intended
for private networks or with IoT devices in isolated deployment scenarios,
i.e. roaming is not considered, as specified in TS 22.261 [7].

When the 5G system is deployed in private networks, the SUPI and SUCI
should be encoded using the NAI format as specified in TS 23.501 [2]. UE
always includes the realm part in the NAI for routing to the correct UDM.


B.2  Primary authentication and key agreement


B.2.1  EAP TLS


B.2.1.1  Security procedures

EAP-TLS is a mutual authentication EAP method that can be used by the EAP
peer and the EAP server to authenticate each other. It is specified in RFC
5216 [38] and draft-ietf-emu-eap-tls13 [76]. The 3GPP TLS protocol profile
related to supported TLS versions and supported TLS cipher suites in 3GPP
networks is specified in clause 6.2 of TS 33.210 [3]. The 3GPP profile of
TLS certificates is specified in clause 6.1.3a of TS 33.310 [5].

EAP-TLS supports several TLS versions, and the negotiation of the TLS
version is part of EAP-TLS. The main principle of negotiation goes as
follows. The EAP server indicates the support for EAP-TLS in the EAP-
Request. If the peer chooses EAP-TLS, it responds with an EAP-Response
indicating in the ClientHello message which TLS versions the peer supports.
The EAP server chooses the TLS version, and indicates the chosen version in
the ServerHello message.

The TLS procedure described in the RFC 5216 [38] is applicable to TLS 1.2
defined in RFC 5246 [40]. The TLS procedure described in the draft-ietf-emu-
eap-tls13 [76] is applicable to TLS 1.3 defined in RFC 8446 [77].

The procedure below is based on the unified authentication framework from
the present document, procedures from TS 23.502 [8] and RFC 5216 [38]. The
procedure for EAP-TLS with TLS 1.2 is presented here as an example, and
other potential procedures are possible, e.g. if TLS resumption is used.

[pic]

Figure B.2.1.1-1: Using EAP-TLS Authentication Procedures over 5G Networks
for initial authentication

1. The UE sends the Registration Request message to the SEAF, containing
SUCI. If the SUPI is in NAI format, only the username part of the NAI is
encrypted using the selected protection scheme and included in the SUCI,
together with the realm part in the NAI needed for UDM routing.

       Privacy considerations are described in Clause B.2.2.

2. The SEAF sends Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message to
the AUSF. The SUCI and the serving network name (as described in clause
6.1.1.4) are included in the message.

3. AUSF sends the the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request, containing SUCI
and the serving network name, to UDM. The general rules for UDM selection
apply.

4. The SIDF located within the UDM de-conceals the SUCI to SUPI if SUCI is
received in the message. The UDM then selects the primary authentication
method.

5. If the UDM chooses to use EAP-TLS, it sends the SUPI and an indicator to
choose EAP-TLS to AUSF in the Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response.

6. With the received SUPI and the indicator, the AUSF chooses EAP-TLS as
the authentication method. The AUSF sends thea
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message containing EAP-
Request/EAP-TLS [TLS start] message to the SEAF.

  7. The SEAF forwards the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [TLS start] in the
    Authentication Request message to the UE. This message also includes
    the ngKSI and the ABBA parameter. In fact, the SEAF shall always
    include the ngKSI and ABBA parameter in all EAP-Authentication request
    message. ngKSI will be used by the UE and AMF to identify the partial
    native security context that is created if the authentication is
    successful. The SEAF shall set the ABBA parameter as defined in Annex
    A.7.1. During an EAP authentication, the value of the ngKSI and the
    ABBA parameter sent by the SEAF to the UE shall not be changed.

8. After receiving the EAP-TLS [TLS-start] message from SEAF, the UE
replies with an EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [client_hello] to the SEAF in the
Authentication Response message. The contents of TLS client_hello are
defined in the TLS specification of the TLS version in use.

NOTE1: The EAP framework supports negotiation of EAP methods. If the UE
does not support EAP-TLS, it should follow the rule described in RFC 3748
[27] to negotiate another EAP method. In 5G system, UDM typically knows
which EAP method and credentials are supported by the subscriber, and
consequently EAP based negotiation may never be used.

9. The SEAF forwards the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [client hello] message to
AUSF in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request.

10.  The AUSF replies to the SEAF with EAP-Request/EAP-TLS in the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response, which further includes
information elements such as server_hello, server_certificate,
server_key_exchange, certificate_request, server_hello_done. These
information elements are defined in the RFCs for the corresponding TLS
version in use.

11.  The SEAF forwards the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS message with server_hello
and other information elements to the UE through Authentication Request
message. This message also includes the ngKSI and the ABBA parameter. The
SEAF shall set the ABBA parameter as defined in Annex A.7.1.

12.  The UE authenticates the server with the received message from step
11.

NOTE 2:  The UE is required to be pre-configured with a UE certificate and
also certificates that can be used to verify server certificates.

13.  If the TLS server authentication is successful, then the UE replies
with EAP-Response/EAP-TLS in Authentication Response message, which further
contains information element such as client_certificate,
client_key_exchange, client_certificate_verify, change_cipher_spec,
client_finished etc. Privacy considerations are described in Clause
B.2.1.2.

14.  The SEAF forwards the message with EAP-Response/EAP-TLS message with
client_certificate and other information elements to the AUSF in the
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request.

15.  The AUSF authenticates the UE based on the message received. The AUSF
verifies that the client certificate provided by the UE belongs to the
subscriber identified by the SUPI. If there is a miss-match in the
subscriber identifiers in the SUPI, the AUSF does not accept the client
certificate. If the AUSF has successfully verified this message, the AUSF
continues to step 16, otherwise it returns an EAP-failure.

NOTE 2:  The AUSF is required to be pre-configured with the root or any
intermediary CA certificates that can be used to verify UE certificates.
Deployment of certificate revocation lists (CRLs) and online certificate
status protocol (OCSP) are described in clause B.2.2.

16.  The AUSF sends EAP-Request/EAP-TLS message with change_cipher_spec and
server_finished to the SEAF in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response.

17.  The SEAF forwards EAP-Request/EAP-TLS message from step 16 to the UE
with Authentication Request message. This message also includes the ngKSI
and the ABBA parameter. The SEAF shall set the ABBA parameter as defined in
Annex A.7.1.

18.  The UE sends an empty EAP-TLS message to the SEAF in Authentication
Response message.

19.  The SEAF further forwards the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS message to the AUSF
in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request.

20.  The AUSF uses the most significant 256 bits of EMSK as the KAUSF and
then calculates KSEAF from KAUSF as described in Annex A.6. The AUSF sends
an EAP-Success message to the SEAF together with the SUPI and the derived
anchor key in the Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response.

21.  The SEAF forwards the EAP-Success message to the UE and the
authentication procedure is finished. This message also includes the ngKSI
and the ABBA parameter. The SEAF shall set the ABBA parameter as defined in
Annex A.7.1. Then the SEAF derives the KAMF from the KSEAF, the ABBA
parameter and the SUPI according to Annex A.7, and provides the ngKSI and
the KAMF to the AMF.

On receiving the EAP-Success message, the UE derives EMSK and uses the most
significant 256 bits of the EMSK as the KAUSF and then calculates KSEAF in
the same way as the AUSF. The UE derives the KAMF from the KSEAF, the ABBA
parameter and the SUPI according to Annex A.7.

           NOTE 3: Step 21 could be NAS Security Mode Command or
           Authentication Result.

    NOTE 4:   The ABBA parameter is included to enable the bidding down
           protection of security features that may be introduced later.

    NOTE 5: As an implementation option, the UE creates the temporary
           security context as described in step 21 after receiving the EAP
           message that allows EMSK to be calculated. The UE turns this
           temporary security context into a partial security context when
           it receives the EAP Success. The UE removes the temporary
           security context if the EAP authentication fails.


B.2.1.2  Privacy considerations


B.2.1.2.1   EAP TLS without subscription identifier privacy

For EAP TLS, if the operator determines to not provide subscription
identifier privacy for the UE in TLS layer (e.g., in TLS 1.2 without
privacy option), the subscription identifier protection in NAS layer, i.e.,
in Step 1 of Figure B.2.1-1, becomes ineffective privacy-wise. Therefore,
the operator may just choose that UE uses "null-scheme" for calculation of
SUCI which is sent in NAS layer. However, the operator may anyway use other
than null-schemes (e.g., one of ECIES schemes) for simplification of having
single scheme for all UEs in NAS layer even though privacy is not enhanced
in this particular case.

The operator could also determine not to provide subscription identifier
privacy for the UE in NAS layer even though the TLS layer inherently
provides subscription identifier privacy (e.g., in TLS 1.3). In such case,
the operator may just choose that UE uses "null-scheme" for calculation of
SUCI which is sent in NAS layer.


B.2.1.2.2   EAP TLS with subscription identifier privacy

For EAP TLS, if the operator determines to provide subscription identifier
privacy for the UE in TLS layer, the the EAP TLS server needs to support
privacy either inherently (e.g., in TLS 1.3) or via separate privacy option
(e.g., in TLS 1.2). If privacy is an option in TLS layer, then the operator
needs to configure UE with the information that privacy-on-TLS layer is
enabled. Further, following considerations need to be taken.

In Step 1 of Figure B.2.1-1, it is important that calculation of SUCI,
which is sent in NAS layer, is done using schemes other than "null-scheme".
Otherwise, the subscription identifier protection provided by TLS layer
becomes ineffective privacy-wise. Nevertheless, the "null-scheme" could be
used in NAS layer while still preserving subscription identifier privacy,
by omitting the username part from NAI as described in RFC 4282 clause 2.3
[y]. It would be analogous to using anonymous identifier in EAP, meaning
that only realm part from NAI is included in SUCI which is sent in NAS
layer. Thus formed SUCI can still be used to route the authentication
request to AUSF.

In Step 13 and 14 of Figure B.2.1-1, when TLS 1.2 is used, the UE would
need to behave as described in "Section 2.1.4. Privacy" of RFC 5216 [38]
where instead of sending the client certificate in cleartext over the air,
the UE first sends TLS certificate (no cert) and only later sends TLS
certificate after a TLS is setup.


B.2.2  Revocation of subscriber certificates

Subscriber certificates that are used with EAP-TLS typically include static
validity times. A certificate revocation list (CRL) as specified in RFC
5280 [48] and online certificate status protocol (OCSP) as specified in RFC
6960 [49] are means for the issuing certificate authority (CA) to revoke
the certificates before their scheduled expiration date. In 5G security
architecture, the UDM/ARPF is responsible for such subscriber status
information. EAP-TLS peers and servers may also support Certificate Status
Requests (OCSP stapling) as specified in RFC6066 [50] which allows peers to
request the server's copy of the current status of certificates.

The deployment of CRLs is demonstrated in figure B.2.2-1. When the UDM/ARPF
maintains the CRLs, the lists may be periodically updated to AUSFs, and
stored locally in AUSF.




B.3  Key derivation

When EAP methods are used with 5G system, the serving network name is
always bound to the anchor key derivation as required in clause 6.1.1.3.

When SEAF acts as a pass-through EAP authenticator, it always includes the
serving network name (constructed as specified in clause 6.1.1.4) into the
authentication request to the AUSFduring the initial authentication
procedure as specified in clause 6.1.2. The AUSF verifies that the SEAF is
authorized to use the serving network name, before it uses the serving
network name to calculate the KSEAF from the KAUSF as described in Annex
A.6. The AUSF always uses the most significant 256 bits of EMSK as the
KAUSF.

When EAP-TLS as specified in RFC 5216 [38] and draft-ietf-emu-eap-tls13
[76] is used for authentication, key materials are derived during
authentication and key agreement procedure, which are further split into
MSK and EMSK. Both UE and AUSF share a 512 bits EMSK key and use the most
significant 256 bits of the EMSK as the KAUSF. The KSEAF is derived based
on the rules specified in Annex A.6.


C.2  Null-scheme

The null-scheme shall be implemented such that it returns the same output
as the input, which applies to both encryption and decryption.

When using the null-scheme, the SUCI does not conceal the SUPI and
therefore the newly generated SUCIs do not need to be fresh.

NOTE 1:  The reason for mentioning the non-freshness is that, normally, in
order to attain unlinkability (i.e., to make it infeasible for over-the-air
attacker to link SUCIs together), it is necessary for newly generated SUCIs
to be fresh. But, in case of the null-scheme, the SUCI does not conceal the
SUPI. So unlinkability is irrelevant.

NOTE 2:  The null-scheme provides no privacy protection.




C.3  Elliptic Curve Integrated Encryption Scheme (ECIES)


C.3.1  General

The use of ECIES for concealment of the SUPI shall adhere to the SECG
specifications [29] and [30]. Processing on UE side and home network side
are described in high level in clauses C.3.2 and C.3.3.

When the SUPI is of type IMSI, the subscription identifier part of the IMSI
(i.e., MSIN) that is used to construct the scheme-input shall be coded as
hexadecimal digits using packed BCD coding where the order of digits within
an octet is same as the order of MSIN digits specified in Figure
9.11.3.4.3a of TS 24.501 [35]. If the MSIN is composed of an odd number of
digits, then the bits 5 to 8 of final octet shall be coded as "1111".

When the SUPI is of type network specific identifier, the subscription
identifier part of the SUPI that is used to construct the scheme-input
shall follow the encoding rules specified in Annex B.2.1.2 of TS 33.220
[28].


C.3.2  Processing on UE side

The ECIES scheme shall be implemented such that for computing a fresh SUCI,
the UE shall use the provisioned public key of the home network and freshly
generated ECC (elliptic curve cryptography) ephemeral public/private key
pair according to the ECIES parameters provisioned by home network. The
processing on UE side shall be done according to the encryption operation
defined in [29]. with the following changes to Section 3.8 and step 5 and 6
of Section 5.1.3.

-  generate keying data K of length enckeylen + icblen + mackeylen.

-  Parse the leftmost enckeylen octets of K as an encryption key EK, the
middle icblen octets of K as an ICB, and
the rightmost mackeylen octets of K as a MAC key MK.

The final output shall be the concatenation of the ECC ephemeral public
key, the ciphertext value, the MAC tag value, and any other parameters, if
applicable.

NOTE:  The reason for mentioning "any other parameter, if applicable" in
the final output is to allow cases, e.g. to enable the sender to send
additional sign indication when point compression is used.

The Figure C.3.2-1 illustrates the UE's steps.

 [pic]

Figure C.3.2-1: Encryption based on ECIES at UE


C.3.3  Processing on home network side

The ECIES scheme shall be implemented such that for deconcealing a SUCI,
the home network shall use the received ECC ephemeral public key of the UE
and the private key of the home network. The processing on home network
side shall be done according to the decryption operation defined in [29].
with the following changes to Section 3.8 and step 6 and 7 of Section
5.1.4.

  -  generate keying data K of length enckeylen + icblen + mackeylen.

-  Parse the leftmost enckeylen octets of K as an encryption key EK, the
middle icblen octets of K as an ICB, and
the rightmost mackeylen octets of K as a MAC key MK.

NOTE:  Unlike the UE, the home network does not need to perform a fresh
ephemeral key pair generation for each decryption. How often the home
network generates new public/private key pair and how the public key is
provisioned to the UE are out of the scope of this clause.


D.1  Null ciphering and integrity protection algorithms

The NEA0 algorithm shall be implemented such that it generates a KEYSTREAM
of all zeroes (see sub-clause D.2.1). The length of the KEYSTREAM generated
shall be equal to the LENGTH input parameter. The generated KEYSTREAM
requires no other input parameters but the LENGTH. Apart from this, all
processing performed in association with ciphering shall be exactly the
same as with any of the ciphering algorithms specified in this Annex.

The NIA0 algorithm shall be implemented in such way that it shall generate
a 32 bit MAC-I/NAS-MAC and XMAC-I/XNAS-MAC of all zeroes (see sub-clause
D.3.1). Replay protection shall not be activated when NIA0 is activated.
All processing performed in association with integrity (except for replay
protection) shall be exactly the same as with any of the integrity
algorithms specified in this annex except that the receiver does not check
the received MAC.

NOTE 1:  The reason for mentioning the replay protection here is that
replay protection is associated with integrity.

The NIA0 shall not be used for signalling radio bearers (SRBs) except for
unauthenticated emergency sessions for unauthenticated UEs in LSM.

The NIA0 shall not be used for data radio bearers (DRBs).

NOTE 2:  A UE with a 2G SIM is considered to be in LSM in NR.

NOTE 3:  NEA0 and NIA0 provide no security.


D.2  Ciphering algorithms


D.2.1  128-bit Ciphering algorithms


D.2.1.1  Inputs and outputs

The input parameters to the ciphering algorithm are a 128-bit cipher key
named KEY, a 32-bit COUNT, a 5-bit bearer identity BEARER, the 1-bit
direction of the transmission i.e. DIRECTION, and the length of the
keystream required i.e. LENGTH. The DIRECTION bit shall be 0 for uplink and
1 for downlink.

Figure D.2.1.1-1 illustrates the use of the ciphering algorithm NEA to
encrypt plaintext by applying a keystream using a bit per bit binary
addition of the plaintext and the keystream. The plaintext may be recovered
by generating the same keystream using the same input parameters and
applying a bit per bit binary addition with the ciphertext.

 [pic]

Figure D.2.1.1-1: Ciphering of data

Based on the input parameters the algorithm generates the output keystream
block KEYSTREAM which is used to encrypt the input plaintext block
PLAINTEXT to produce the output ciphertext block CIPHERTEXT.

The input parameter LENGTH shall affect only the length of the KEYSTREAM
BLOCK, not the actual bits in it.


D.2.1.2  128-NEA1

128-NEA1 is identical to 128-EEA1 as specified in Annex B of TS 33.401
[10].


D.2.1.3  128-NEA2

128-NEA2 is identical to 128-EEA2 as specified in Annex B of TS 33.401
[10].


D.2.1.4  128-NEA3

128-NEA3 is identical to 128-EEA3 as specified in Annex B of TS 33.401
[10].


D.3  Integrity algorithms


D.3.1  128-Bit integrity algorithms


D.3.1.1  Inputs and outputs

The input parameters to the integrity algorithm are a 128-bit integrity key
named KEY, a 32-bit COUNT, a 5-bit bearer identity called BEARER, the 1-bit
direction of the transmission i.e. DIRECTION, and the message itself i.e.
MESSAGE. The DIRECTION bit shall be 0 for uplink and 1 for downlink. The
bit length of the MESSAGE is LENGTH.

Figure D.3.1.1-1 illustrates the use of the integrity algorithm NIA to
authenticate the integrity of messages.

 [pic]

Figure D.3.1.1-1: Derivation of MAC-I/NAS-MAC (or XMAC-I/XNAS-MAC)

Based on these input parameters the sender computes a 32-bit message
authentication code (MAC-I/NAS-MAC) using the integrity algorithm NIA. The
message authentication code is then appended to the message when sent. For
integrity protection algorithms, the receiver computes the expected message
authentication code (XMAC-I/XNAS-MAC) on the message received in the same
way as the sender computed its message authentication code on the message
sent and verifies the data integrity of the message by comparing it to the
received message authentication code, i.e. MAC-I/NAS-MAC.


D.3.1.2  128-NIA1

128-NIA1 is identical to 128-EIA1 as specified in Annex B of TS 33.401
[10].


D.3.1.3  128-NIA2

128-NIA2 is identical to 128-EIA2 as specified in Annex B of TS 33.401
[10].


D.3.1.4  128-NIA3

128-NIA3 is identical to 128-EIA3 as specified in Annex B of TS 33.401
[10].


D.4  Test Data for the security algorithms


D.4.1  General

Annex D.4 contains references to the test data for each of the specified
algorithms.


D.4.2  128-NEA1

For 128-NEA1 is the test data for UEA2 in TS 35.217 [36] can be reused
directly as there is an exact, one-to-one mapping between UEA2 inputs and
128-NEA1 inputs.


D.4.3  128-NIA1

For 128-NIA1 is the test data for 128-EIA1 in clause C.4 of TS 33.401 [10]
can be reused directly as there is an exact, one-to-one mapping between 128-
EIA1 inputs and 128-NIA1 inputs.


D.4.4  128-NEA2

For 128-NEA2 is the test data for 128-EEA2 in clause C.1 of TS 33.401 [10]
can be reused directly as there is an exact, one-to-one mapping between 128-
EEA2 inputs and 128-NEA2 inputs.


D.4.5  128-NIA2

For 128-NIA2 is the test data for 128-EIA2 in clause C.2 of TS 33.401 [10]
can be reused directly as there is an exact, one-to-one mapping between 128-
EIA2 inputs and 128-NIA2 inputs.


D.4.6  128-NEA3

For 128-NEA3 is the test data for 128-EEA3 in TS 35.223 [37] can be reused
directly as there is an exact, one-to-one mapping between 128-EEA3 inputs
and 128-NEA3 inputs.


D.4.7  128-NIA3

For 128-NIA3 is the test data for 128-EIA3 in TS 35.223 [37] can be reused
directly as there is an exact, one-to-one mapping between 128-EIA3 inputs
and 128-NIA3 inputs.



         Annex E (informative):
         UE-assisted network-based detection of false base station


E.1  Introduction

The UE in RRC_CONNECTED mode sends measurement reports to the network in
accordance with the measurement configuration provided by the network.
These measurement reports have security values in being useful for
detection of false base stations or SUPI/5G-GUTI catchers. The network, in
an implementation specific way, could choose UEs or tracking areas or
duration for which the measurement reports are to be analysed for detection
of false base station. The present Annex gives examples of how measurement
reports from UEs could be used for detection of false base station, and
some actions thereafter.


E.2  Examples of using measurement reports

The received-signal strength and location information in measurement
reports can be used to detect a false base station which attract the UEs by
transmitting signal with higher power. They can also be used to detect a
false base station which replays the genuine MIB/SIB without modification.

In order to detect a false base station which replays modified version of
broadcast information to prevent victim UEs from switching back and forth
between itself and genuine base stations (e.g. modifying neighbouring
cells, cell reselection criteria, registration timers, etc. to avoid the so
called ping-pong effect), information on broadcast information can be used
to detect inconsistency from the deployment information.

Further, a false base station which uses inconsistent cell identifier or
operates in inconsistent frequency than the deployment of the genuine base
stations, can be detected respectively by using the cell identifier or the
frequency information in the measurement reports.

Measurement reports collected from multiple UEs can be used to filter out
incorrect reports sent by a potential rogue UE.

Upon detection of the false base station, the operator can take further
actions, e.g. informing legal authorities or contacting the victim UE.



         Annex F (normative):
         3GPP 5G profile for EAP-AKA'


F.1  Introduction

The present annex describes the 3GPP 5G profile for EAP-AKA' described in
RFC 5448 [12], and RFC 4187 [21].

NOTE:  RFC 5448 [12] was specified for the needs of LTE and it does not
take into account nor refer to 5G specifications. EAP-AKA identity
handling, when it comes to 5G, is specified in the present Annex F. RFC
5448 [12] has been updated in RFC 9048  [67] to align with the 5G
specifications and especially with Annex F. Otherwise RFC 9048  [67] is
technically backwards compatible with RFC 5448 [12] . The present document
uses RFC 5448 [12] as the normative reference and in case of technical
discrepancy, RFC 5448 [12] and the present document take precedence over
RFC 9048  [67].


F.2  Subscriber privacy

EAP-AKA' includes optional support for identity privacy mechanism that
protects the privacy against passive eavesdropping. The mechanism is
described in RFC 4187 [21] clause 4.1.1.2, and it uses pseudonyms that are
delivered from the EAP server to the peer as part of an EAP-AKA exchange.
The privacy mechanism described in [21] corresponds to the privacy provided
by 5G-GUTI, however, assignment of 5G-GUTI is done outside the EAP
framework in 5GS.

TS 33.501 assumes that the SUCI is sent outside the EAP messages, however,
the peer may still receive EAP-Request/Identity or EAP-Request/AKA-Identity
messages. Table F.2-1 specifies how the 5G UE shall behave when receiving
such requests.

1)   RFC 3748 [27] allows the peer to respond with abbreviated Identity
Response where the peer-name portion of the NAI has been omitted. The 5G UE
responds with SUCI in the same format as sent in the Registration Request,
where the peer name has been encrypted.

2)   RFC 4187 [21] allows the peer to respond with a pseudonym (cf. 5G-
GUTI) or the permanent identity (i.e. SUPI). The 5G UE follows the
"conservative" policy that has been described in RFC 4187 [21] clause 4.1.6
(Attacks against Identity Privacy) for the pseudonym based privacy, i.e.
the peer shall not reveal its permanent identity. Instead, the peer shall
send the EAP-Response/AKA-Client-Error packet with the error code "unable
to process packet", and the authentication exchange terminates. The peer
assumes that the EAP-Request/AKA-Identity originates from an attacker that
impersonates the network, and for this reason refuses to send the cleartext
SUPI.

3)   RFC 4187 [21] allows the peer to respond with a pseudonym (cf. 5G-
GUTI) or the permanent identity (i.e. SUPI). The 5G UE responds with SUCI.

4)   RFC 4187 [21] allows the peer to respond with a fast re-authentication
identity, pseudonym (cf. 5G-GUTI) or the permanent identity (i.e. SUPI). If
the 5G UE supports fast re-authentication, it responds with the fast re-
authentication identity, and if the 5G UE does not support fast re-
authentication, it responds with SUCI.


F.3  Subscriber identity and key derivation

EAP-AKA' uses the subscriber identity (Identity) as an input to the key
derivation when the key derivation function has value 1 ( i.e. MK =
PRF'(IK'|CK',"EAP-AKA'"|Identity)). RFC 4187 [21] clause 7 describes that
the Identity is taken from the EAP-Response/Identity or EAP-Response/AKA-
Identity AT_IDENTITY attribute sent by the peer. This principle is not
applied to the 5GS.

If the AT_KDF_INPUT parameter contains the prefix "5G:", the AT_KDF
parameter has the value 1 and the authentication is not related to fast re-
authentication, then the UE shall set as the Identity for key derivation.
When the SUPI Type is IMSI, the Identity shall be set to IMSI as defined in
clause 2.2 of TS 23.003 [19]. When the SUPI type is network specific
identifier, the Identity shall be set to Network Access Identifier (NAI) as
defined in clause 28.7.2 of TS 23.003 [19]. When the SUPI type is GLI, the
Identity shall be set to GLI taking format of NAI as defined in clause
28.15.2 of TS 23.003 [19]. When the SUPI type is GCI, the Identity shall be
set to GLI taking format of NAI as defined in clause 28.16.2 of TS 23.003
[19]. This principle applies to all full EAP-AKA' authentications, even if
the UE sent SUCI in NAS protocol or if the UE sent SUCI in the respose to
the EAP identity requests as described in Table F.2-1 or if no identity was
sent because the network performed re-authentication. The only exception is
fast re-authentication when the UE follows the key derivation as described
in RFC 5448 [12] for fast re-authentication.

NOTE 1:  The fast re-authentication is not supported in 5GS.

NOTE 2:  The prefix "5G:" is part of serving network name as specified in
clause 6.1.1.4.


F.4  Void




Annex G (informative):
         Application layer security on the N32 interface


G.1  Introduction

The SEPP as described in clause 4.2.1 is the entity that sits at the
perimeter of the network and performs application layer security on the
HTTP message before it is sent externally over the roaming interface.

The application layer traffic comprises all the IEs in the HTTP message
payload, sensitive information in HTTP message header and Request URI. Not
all the IEs get the same security treatment in SEPP. Some IEs require e2e
encryption, some only require e2e integrity protection, while other IEs may
require e2e integrity protection but modifiable by intermediate IPX
provider while in-transit.

[pic]

Figure G.1-1: Signaling message from AMF (vPLMN) to AUSF (hPLMN) traversing
the respective SEPPs

In the above figure, an example is shown where the AMF NF in the visiting
PLM network (vPLMN) invokes an API request on the AUSF NF in the home PLM
network (hPLMN) using the following message flow:

-  The AMF NF first sends the HTTP Request message to its local SEPP (i.e.
vSEPP).

-  The vSEPP applies application layer security (PRINS) and sends the
secure message on the N32 interface to AUSF NF of the hPLMN.

-  The hSEPP at the edge of the hPLMN, receives all incoming HTTP messages
from its roaming partners. It verifies the message, removes the protection
mechanism applied at the application layer, and forwards the resulting HTTP
message to the corresponding AUSF NF.

To allow for the trusted intermediary IPX nodes to see and possibly modify
specific IEs in the HTTP message, while completely protecting all sensitive
information end to end between SEPPs, the SEPP implements application layer
security in such a way that:

-  Sensitive information such as authentication vectors are fully e2e
confidentiality protected between two SEPPs. This ensures that no node in
the IPX network shall be able to view such information while in-transit.

-  IEs that are subject to modification by intermediary IPX nodes are
integrity protected and can only be modified in a verifiable way by
authorized IPX nodes.

-  Receiving SEPP can detect modification by unauthorized IPX nodes.


G.2  Structure of HTTP Message

Following is a typical structure of the HTTP Message:

 [pic]

Figure G.2-1 Typical structure of the HTTP message received by SEPP

It consists of:

-  HTTP Message payload with JSON based IEs

-  HTTP Headers with or without sensitive elements

-  HTTP Request-URI with or without sensitive elements such as SUPI.

In the outgoing direction, i.e. towards the N32 interface, the SEPP shall
parse the HTTP message fully and apply protection on each part as required.

In the incoming direction, i.e. towards the Network Function, the SEPP
shall verify the message, and if successful reassemble the original message
and send it to the destined Network Function.





Annex H (informative):
         Void



         Annex I (normative):
         Non-public networks


I.1  General

This Annex provides details on security for non-public networks. Most of
the security procedures are the same as public networks so this annex only
summarizes and specifies where there are exceptions to the normal
procedures.

The feature for support of non-public networks (NPN) by 5GS is described in
clause 5.30 of 23.501 [2].


I.2  Authentication in standalone non-public networks


I.2.1  General

One of the major differences of non-public networks is that authentication
methods other than AKA based ones may be used in a standalone non-public
network (SNPN). When an AKA-based authentication method is used, clause 6.1
shall apply. When an authentication method other than 5G AKA or EAP-AKA' is
used, only the non-AKA specific parts of clause 6.1 shall apply. An example
of running such an authentication method is given in Annex B with EAP-TLS.

The choice of the supported authentication methods for access to SNPNs
follows the principles described in clauses I.2.2 and I.2.3.


I.2.2  EAP framework, selection of authentication method, and EAP method
         credentials


I.2.2.1  General

The EAP authentication framework is supported by the 5GS as described in
clause 6.1.1.2.

The UE and the SNPN may support 5G AKA, EAP-AKA', or any other key-
generating EAP authentication method.

Selection of the authentication methods is dependent on NPN configuration.

NOTE 1: For EAP-AKA' (as well as 5G AKA), the selection is described in
clause 6.1.2. For authentication,  that is not using EAP-AKA' (or 5G AKA),
the selection is NPN operator deployment specific and out of scope of this
specification.

When an EAP authentication method other than EAP-AKA' is selected, the
chosen method determines the credentials needed in the UE and network.
These credentials, called the EAP-method credentials, shall be used for
authentication.

NOTE 2: How credentials for EAP methods other than EAP-AKA' are stored and
processed within the UE is out of the scope for standalone non-public
networks.

NOTE 3:  Storage and processing of credentials for EAP-AKA' (as well as 5G
AKA) is described in clause 6 of the present document.


I.2.2.2  Credentials holder using AAA server for primary authentication


I.2.2.2.1   General


The procedures described in this clause enables UEs to access an SNPN which
makes use of a credential management system managed by a credential
provider external to the SNPN.


In this scenario the authentication server role is taken by the AAA Server.
The AUSF acts as EAP authenticator and interacts with the AAA Server to
execute the primary authentication procedure.

The architecture for SNPN access using credentials from a Credentials
Holder using AAA Server is described in clause 5.30.2.9.2 of TS 23.501 [2].



I.2.2.2.2   Procedure

[pic]

Figure: I.2.2.2.2-1: Primary authentication with external domain

0. The UE shall be configured with credentials from the Credentials holder
e.g. SUPI containing a network-specific identifier and credentials for the
key-generating EAP-method used. As part of configuration of the
credentials, the UE shall also be configured with an indication that the UE
shall use MSK for the derivation of KAUSF after the success of the primary
authentication.  The exact procedures used to configure the UE are not
specified in the present document.

   It is further assumed that there exists a trust relation between the
SNPN and the Credentials holder AAA Server. These entities need to be
mutually authenticated, and the information transferred on the interface
need to be confidentiality, integrity and replay protected.

When the procedures of this clause are used for onboarding purposes, the
onboarding specific adaptations includes: the 'credentials' used is
'Default credentials',the 'SUPI' used is 'onboarding SUPI', the 'SUCI'
used is 'onboarding SUCI' respectively.

1. The UE shall select the SNPN and initiate UE registration in the SNPN.

   For construction of the SUCI, existing methods in clause 6.12 can be
used. Otherwise, if the EAP method supports SUPI privacy, the UE may send
an anonymous value SUCI based on configuration.

2. The AMF within the SNPN shall initiate a primary authentication for the
UE using a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate service operation with the
AUSF. The AMF shall discover and select an AUSF based  on criterions
specified in TS23.501[2] clause 5.30.2.9.2.

3. In the case of onboarding, steps 3-5 are omitted. If steps 3-5 are not
omitted, the AUSF shall initiate a Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get service
operation. The AUSF shall discover and select a UDM based on criterions
specified in TS 23.501 [2] clause 5.30.2.9.

NOTE 1:  SUPI will be used instead of SUCI in the case of a re-
authentication.

4.   In case the UDM receives a SUCI, the UDM shall resolve the SUCI to the
SUPI before checking the authentication method applicable for the SUPI. The
UDM decides to run primary authentication with an external entity based on
subscription data.

In case the UDM receives an anonymous SUCI, the UDM decides to run primary
authentication with an external entity based the realm part of the SUPI in
NAI format.

NOTE 1a: The UDM needs to be configured with a list of realms and the
intended authentication server (external or internal)

   In case the UDM receives an anonymous SUCI that does not contain the
realm part, the UDM shall abort the procedure. Otherwise, the UDM
authorizes the UE based on realm part of SUCI and send the anonymous SUPI
and the indicator to the AUSF as described in step5.

   The anonymous SUPI shall be a NAI format.

5. In case the UDM received a SUCI in previous steps, the UDM shall provide
the AUSF with the SUPI or anonymous SUPI and shall indicate to the AUSF to
run primary authentication with a AAA Server in an external Credentials
holder.

   When a Credentials Holder using AAA Server is used for primary
authentication, the AUSF uses the MSK to derive KAUSF. It is strongly
recommended that the same credentials that are used for authentication
between UE and the 5G SNPN are not used for the authentication between the
UE and a non-5G network, assuming that 5G SNPN and non-5G network are in
different security domains.

NOTE 2:  MSKs obtained from the non-5G network could be used to impersonate
the 5G SNPN towards the UE.

6. Based on the indication from the UDM, the AUSF shall select an NSSAAF as
defined in  TS 23.501 [2] and initiate a Nnssaaf_AIWF_Authenticate service
operation towards that NSSAAF as defined in clause 14.4.2.

7. The NSSAAF shall select AAA Server based on the domain name
corresponding to the realm part of the SUPI. The NSSAAF shall perform
related protocol conversion and relay EAP messages to the AAA Server.

NOTE 3:  The interface and protocol between NSSAAF and AAA is out of scope
of the present document and existing AAA protocols such as RADIUS or
Diameter can be used.

8. The UE and AAA Server shall perform mutual authentication. The AAA
Server shall act as the EAP Server for the purpose of primary
authentication. The EAP Identity received by the AAA Server in the EAP-
Response/Identity message in step 7 may contain anonymised SUPI. In such
cases, AAA Server uses the EAP-method specific EAP Identity
request/response messages to obtain the UE identifier as part of the EAP
authentication between the UE and the AAA Server.

9. After successful authentication, the MSK and the SUPI (i.e., the UE
identifier that is used for the successful EAP authentication) shall be
provided from the AAA Server to the NSSAAF.

10.  The NSSAAF returns the MSK and the SUPI to the AUSF using the
Nnssaaf_AIWF_Authenticate service operation response message. The SUPI
received from the AAA shall be used when deriving 5G keys (e.g., KAMF) that
requires SUPI as an input for the key derivation.

11-13. In case of onboarding or SUCI received in step 2 is not anonymous,
steps 11-13 are omitted. Otherwise, the AUSF verifies that the SUPI
corresponds to a valid subscription in the SNPN by informing the UDM about
the authentication result for the received SUPI using a
Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation service operation. The UDM stores
the authentication state for the SUPI and if there is not a subscription
corresponding to the SUPI, the UDM shall return an error.

If the verification of the SUPI is not successful, then the AUSF rejects
the UE access to the SNPN.

NOTE 4: If the above failure happens, the error is no failed authentication
but lacking subscription in the SNPN.

14. The AUSF shall use the most significant 256 bits of MSK as the KAUSF.
The AUSF shall also derive KSEAF from the KAUSF as defined in Annex A.6.

15. The AUSF shall send the successful indication together with the SUPI of
the UE to the AMF together with the resulting KSEAF.

16. The AMF shall send the EAP success in a NAS message.

17. The UE shall derive the KAUSF from MSK as described in step 11
according to the pre-configured indication as described in step 0.


I.2.3  Key hierarchy, key derivation and key distribution


I.2.3.1  General

The text in clauses 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 cannot apply directly for an EAP
authentication method other than EAP-AKA' as these clauses assume that an
AKA-based authentication method is used. The major differences are the way
in which KAUSF is calculated and that the UDM/ARPF is not necessarily
involved in the key derivation or distribution.

Depending on the selected authentication method, the KAUSF is generated as
follows:

-  For 5G AKA and EAP-AKA' refer to clause 6.2.1.

-  When using a key-generating EAP authentication method other than EAP-
AKA', the key derivation of KAUSF is based on the EAP-method credentials in
the UE and AUSF and shall be done as shown in Figure I.2.3-1.

NOTE: For EAP authentication methods other than EAP-AKA', this key
derivation replaces clauses 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 for the generation of KAUSF .



[pic]

Figure I.2.3.1-1: KAUSF derivation for key-generating EAP authentication
methods other than EAP-AKA'

KAUSF shall be derived by the AUSF and UE from the EMSK created by the EAP
authentication as for EAP-AKA'.

All of figures 6.2.1-1, 6.2.2.1-1 and 6.2.2.2.2-1 from the KAUSF downwards
are used without modification. Similarly, text relating to the key
hierarchy, key derivation and key distribution in clauses 6.2.1, 6.2.2.1
and 6.2.2.2 for keys derived from KAUSF (e.g. KSEAF, KAMF, KgNB etc) apply
without modification.


I.2.3.2  Credentials holder using AAA server for primary authentication

When running primary authentication towards an external Credentials holder
using AAA server for authentication as specified in clause I.2.2.2 the
derivation of KAUSF is based on the EAP-method credentials in the UE and
AAA-S and shall be done as shown in Figure I.2.3.2-1.

[pic]

Figure I.2.3.2-1: KAUSF derivation for primary authentication towards an
external Credentials holder using AAA server

KAUSF shall be derived by the AUSF and UE from the MSK derived during the
EAP authentication as specified in clause I.2.2.2.1.

All of figures 6.2.1-1, 6.2.2.1-1 and 6.2.2.2.2-1 from the KAUSF downwards
are used without modification. Similarly, text relating to the key
hierarchy, key derivation and key distribution in clauses 6.2.1, 6.2.2.1
and 6.2.2.2 for keys derived from KAUSF (e.g. KSEAF, KAMF, KgNB etc) apply
without modification.


I.2.4  Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary authentication

The 5G System architecture for SNPN with Credentials Holder using AUSF and
UDM for primary authentication and authorization is described in clause
5.30.2.9.3 of TS 23.501 [2].

The requirements and procedures for primary authentication using AUSF and
UDM as described in the present document apply, for 5G AKA, EAP-AKA', EAP-
TLS or any other key-generating EAP method.


I.3  Serving network name for standalone non-public networks


I.3.1  General

The identification of standalone non-public networks uses Network
Identifier (NID) in addition to PLMN ID. This means the definition of SN Id
in clause 6.1.1.4.1 for the derivation of KSEAF for all authentication
methods, CK' and IK' for EAP-AKA', and KAUSF and (X)RES* for 5G AKA needs
modification for standalone non-public networks.


I.3.2  Definition of SN Id for standalone non-public networks

For standalone non-public networks, the SN Id (used in the input for
various key/parameter derivations) identifies the serving SNPN.

It is defined as follows:

  SN Id = PLMN ID:NID

and is specified in detail in TS 24.501 [35].


I.4  Modification of CAG ID list in the UE

The following requirements apply to NAS messages that modify the list of
CAG IDs stored in the UE:

-  the AMF shall only send such a NAS message once NAS security has been
established; and

-  the UE shall only modify its list of CAG IDs after successful integrity
verification of the integrity protected NAS message requesting such a
modification.


I.5  SUPI privacy for standalone non-public networks

The UE shall support SUPI privacy as defined in clause 6.12 with the
following exception. When using an authentication method other than 5G AKA
or EAP-AKA', the location of the functionality related to SUPI privacy in
the UE is out of scope.

In scenarios where the EAP-method supports privacy, the UE may send an
anonymous SUCI based on configuration.

Furthermore, the privacy considerations for EAP TLS (given in Annex
B.2.1.2) should be taken into account when using an authentication method
other than 5G AKA or EAP-AKA'.


I.6  Authentication in Public Network Integrated Non-Public Networks (PNI-
         NPN)

For public network integrated NPN (PNI-NPN), the primary authentication
shall be performed with the public network as described in clause 6.1.
Secondary authentication as described in clause 11 and slice-specific
authentication as described in the main body can take place after a
successful primary authentication.


I.7  Authorization aspects in SNPNs


I.7.1  Credentials holder using AUSF and UDM for primary authentication

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, service authorization as specified in clause 13.4.1.2
applies.


I.8  SEPP and interconnect related security procedures


I.8.1  Credentials holder using AUSF and UDM for primary authentication

For SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for primary
authentication, clause 5.30.2.9.3 of TS 23.501 [2] states that the UE is
not considered to be roaming, however SNPN and Credentials Holder
communicate via SEPPs.

The following requirements and procedures related to SEPPs and interconnect
security apply for SNPNs with Credentials Holder using AUSF and UDM for
primary authentication:

-  Requirements for Security Edge Protection Proxy (SEPP), clause 5.9.3.2

-  Protection between SEPPs, clause 13.1.2.

NOTE:  IPX providers are not expected to be used between SNPN and
Credentials holder using AUSF and UDM for primary authentication.


I.9  Security of UE onboarding in SNPNs


I.9.1  General

Onboarding of UEs for SNPNs is specified in clause 5.30.2.10 of TS 23.501
[2].

Onboarding of UEs for SNPNs allows the UE to access an Onboarding Network
(ONN) based on Default UE credentials for the purpose of provisioning the
UE with SNPN credentials and any other necessary information. The Default
UE credentials are pre-configured on the UE. Default UE credentials consist
of credentials for primary authentication and optionally credentials for
secondary authentication.

To provision SNPN credentials in a UE that is configured with Default UE
credentials, the UE selects an SNPN as ONN and establishes a secure
connection  with that SNPN referred to as Onboarding SNPN (ON-SNPN).

The present clause specifies security of UE onboarding.


I.9.2  Authentication


I.9.2.1  Requirements

The primary authentication shall be performed before UE onboarding is
allowed. For primary authentication, the UE shall use Default UE
credentials for primary authentication. Credentials or means used to
authenticate the UE based on Default UE credentials for primary
authentication may be stored within the ON-SNPN or in a Default Credentials
Server (DCS) that is external to the ON-SNPN.

The UE shall use Onboarding SUPI and Onboarding SUCI as specified in TS
24.501 [35] during Onboarding Registration.


I.9.2.2  Primary authentication without using DCS

When the primary authentication is performed between the UE and the ON-
SNPN, any one of the existing authentication methods defined in the present
document may be used, i.e., 5G AKA, EAP-AKA or any other key-generating
EAP authentication method (e.g., EAP-TLS).

The choice of primary authentication method used is left to the decision of
the ON-SNPN.

Credentials required to authenticate the UE using default UE credentials
for primary authentication, are provisioned at the AUSF or AUSF/UDM of the
ON-SNPN. The provisioning of this information is out of scope of this
document.


I.9.2.3  Primary authentication using DCS

When the primary authentication is performed between the UE and the DCS,
the authentication requirements and procedures defined in clause I.2 for
Credential Holder shall apply with the DCS taking the role of the
Credentials Holder. When the DCS uses AAA Server for primary
authentication, AUSF directly selects the NSSAAF as specified in 23.501
[2]. In this case, the UDM is not involved in the procedure defined in
clause I.2.2.2.2, and the step 3 to step 5 shall be skipped. When 5G AKA or
EAP-AKA is used, the DCS shall act as a AUSF/UDM.

The choice of primary authentication method used between the UE and the DCS
is left to the decision of the DCS.

When the primary authentication is performed between the UE and the DCS via
the AUSF using EAP-TTLS, Annex U can be used.


I.9.2.4  Secondary authentication


I.9.2.4.1   Secondary authentication using DCS

After successful primary authentication as described in I.9.2.2 (i.e.
primary authentication without using DCS), upon the establishment of the
Onboarding PDU Session, the ON-SNPN may trigger secondary authentication
procedure with the DCS using  Default UE credentials for secondary
authentication, as described in clause 11.1.

NOTE:  If both primary and secondary authentication use a certificate-based
authentication method like e.g. EAP-TLS, and if required by the use case,
it is possible to configure the UE with the same client certificates for
Default UE credentials for secondary authentication as for the Default UE
credentials for primary authentication.


I.9.2.4.2   Secondary authentication using DN-AAA

After successful primary authentication as described in I.9.2.2 or I.9.2.3,
upon the establishment of the Onboarding PDU Session, the ON-SNPN may
trigger secondary authentication procedure with a DN-AAA server using
Default UE credentials for secondary authentication, as described in clause
11.1.



         Annex J (normative):
          SRVCC from 5G to UTRAN


J.1  SRVCC from NR to UTRAN


J.1.1  General

5G Single Radio Voice Call Continuity (SRVCC) is specified in 3GPP TS
23.216 [72], TS 23.501 [2] and TS 23.502 [8]. This clause specifies the
security aspect to support SRVCC from 5G to UTRAN. SRVCC from UTRAN to 5G
shall not be allowed. After a 5G to UTRAN SRVCC session has terminated, a
UE shall run a successfully (re)authentication in 5GS before allowed to
access 5G.

During SRVCC from 5G to UTRAN CS, the MSC server should never know the KAMF
nor should the KAMF be revealed to an entity other than an AMF.

The AMF derives new key(s) to create a mapped SRVCC security context for
the MSC server instead of sending KAMF to the MSC server.


J.1.2  Procedure

As described in TS 23.216[72], there is no direct interface between the AMF
in 5G and the MSC in UTRAN to support SRVCC, so the keys used to protect
the SRVCC session once the UE is handed over to UTRAN are derived by MME
based on security context mapping from 5G to E-UTRAN and then forwarded to
the MSC during the HO procedure.

The procedure is initiated when the gNB wants to trigger a 5G SRVCC
handover to UTRAN.

[pic]

Figure J.1.2-1: Key derivation of 5G SRVCC from NR to UTRAN

1. The gNB sends Handover required message to the AMF.

2. The AMF shall derive a new KASME_SRVCC key using the KAMF key and the
current downlink 5G NAS COUNT of the current 5G security context as
described in clause A.21. The AMF increases the downlink 5G NAS COUNT by
one.

3. The AMF shall assign the value of ngKSI to the eKSI (maps ngKSI to eKSI)
and shall transfer the new KASME_SRVCC key and the UE security capability
to the MME_SRVCC via Forward relocation request message.

4. The MME_SRVCC shall derive the CKSRVCC, IKSRVCC based on the new
KASME_SRVCC key as in clause A.12 in TS 33.401 [10] using a downlink NAS
COUNT of zero.

5. The MME_SRVCC assigns the value of eKSI to KSISRVCC (maps eKSI to
KSISRVCC) and transfers CKSRVCC, IKSRVCC with KSISRVCC and the UE security
capability to the MSC server in PS to CS HO request message.

6. The MSC server sends the PS to CS HO response message to the MME_SRVCC.

7. The MME_SRVCC sends the Forward relocation response message to the AMF.

8. The AMF sends the HO command to the gNB, in which the AMF shall include
the 4 LSBs of the downlink NAS COUNT used to calculate KASME_SRVCC.

9. The gNB sends the HO command to the UE, in which the gNB shall include
the 4 LSB of the downlink NAS COUNT received from the AMF.

10. When the UE receives the message, the UE shall derive the new
KASME_SRVCC key as described in Annex A.21 using the KAMF key and the
downlink 5G NAS COUNT estimated from the 4 LSB received form the AMF. The
UE shall further derive CKSRVCC, IKSRVCC based on the new KASME_SRVCC key
as described in the clause A.12 in TS 33.401 [10] using a downlink NAS
COUNT of zero. The UE shall identify the CKSRVCC and IKSRVCC from eKSI (=
ngKSI) as the MME_SRVCC does.

If the SRVCC handover is not completed successfully, the new mapped
CKSRVCC, IKSRVCC and KSISRVCC cannot be used. In this case, the MSC server
enhanced for SRVCC shall delete the newly mapped SRVCC security context for
the UE, including CKSRVCC, IKSRVCC and KSISRVCC.


J.2  Emergency call in SRVCC from NR to UTRAN


J.2.1  General

IMS Emergency Sessions can be authenticated or unauthenticated depending on
the serving network policy (or regulatory requirements) if unauthenticated
IMS Emergency Sessions are allowed. Any behaviour not explicitly specified
as being special to IMS Emergency Sessions is handled in accordance to
normal procedures.


J.2.2  Procedure

When the SVRCC is for an emergency session, the security procedure in
clause J.1.2 is applied.

However, in the case when the SRVCC is for an unauthenticated emergency
session, since the derived keys have no ability to affect the output of the
NULL algorithms, call set up needs to continue even though the network and
the UE derive different keys.



         Annex K (normative):
         Security for 5GLAN services


K.1  General

5GLAN services are described in 3GPP TS 23.501 [2] and 3GPP TS 23.502 [8].


K.2  Authentication and authorization

For authentication and authorization of a UE in 5G LAN communication, the
secondary authentication procedures between UE and external data networks
via the 5G Network as described in clause 11 shall apply.


K.3  Handling of UP security policy

To reduce incremental complexity added by security, all PDU sessions
associated with a specific 5G LAN group should have the same UP security
policy.





         Annex L (normative):
         Security for TSC service


L.1  General

The 5G TSC service is described in 3GPP TS 23.501 [2]. It allows the 5G
System to be integrated transparently as a bridge in an IEEE TSN network
[75], where the 5GS system acts as one or more TSN Bridges of a TSN
network.


L.2  Access security for a 5GS TSC-enabled UE

A 5GS TSC-enabled UE accesses the 5G network as described in this document
except where differences are provided in the following clauses.


L.3  Protection of user plane data in TSC including (g)PTP control messages
         in bridge mode

After the 5GS TSC-enabled UE is authenticated and data connection is set
up, any data received from a TSC bridge or another 5GS TSC-enabled UE shall
be transported between DS-TT (in the UE) and NW-TT (in the UPF) in a
protected way using the mechanisms for UP security as described in clause
6.6.

The UP security enforcement information shall be set to "required" for data
transferred from gNB to a 5GS TSC-enabled UE. This is also applicable to
the (g)PTP messages sent in the user plane.


L.4  Exposure of time synchronisation

Any AF that has knowledge of deterministic application requirements is able
to request TSC services from the 5GS by interfacing with NEF, and as
authorized, can be notified of pertinent network events. The security
solution as described in clause 12 shall apply.



         Annex M (normative):
         Security for Integrated Access and Backhaul (IAB)


M.1  General

This Annex provides the security procedures applied to NR IAB architecture
and functional entities for supporting wireless backhauling of NR base
stations.

The overall stage 2 description for IAB architecture and functional
entities are described in 3GPP TS 23.501 [2] and 3GPP TS 38.401 [78].

The security requirements and security procedures applied to IAB in EN-DC
architecture are defined in both TS 33.401 [10] and in the present
document. The security requirements and security procedures between the IAB-
node and the MeNB (i.e., when the IAB-node connects via E-UTRA to a MeNB),
are defined in TS 33.401 [10] and between the IAB-node and the SgNB (F1
interface) are defined in this clause.


M.2  Security requirements and features


M.2.1  Requirements on the IAB-node (IAB-UE)

The IAB-node (IAB-UE) shall support ciphering, integrity protection and
replay protection of NAS-signalling between the IAB-node (IAB-UE) and the
5GC supporting IAB architecture.

The IAB-node (IAB-UE) shall support ciphering, integrity protection and
replay protection of RRC-signalling between the IAB-node (IAB-UE) and the
IAB donor.

Mutual authentication between the IAB-node (IAB-UE) and the 5GC supporting
IAB architecture shall be supported.


M.2.2  Requirements on the IAB donor

The IAB donor shall support ciphering, integrity protection and replay
protection of RRC-signalling between the IAB donor and the IAB-node (IAB-
UE).


M.2.3  Requirements on the 5GC supporting IAB architecture

The 5GC supporting IAB architecture shall support ciphering, integrity
protection and replay protection of NAS-signalling between the 5GC
supporting IAB architecture and the IAB-node (IAB-UE).

Mutual authentication between the 5GC supporting IAB architecture and the
IAB-node (IAB-UE) shall be supported.

The 5GC shall decide whether the IAB-node is authorized to operate as IAB-
node (gNB-DU).


M.2.4  Requirements for secure environment

The security requirements for secure environment of the IAB-node (gNB-DU)
and the IAB-donor are described in clause 5.3.8 of this document.


M.2.5  Requirements on the F1 interface

The security requirements on the F1 interface between the IAB-node (gNB-DU)
and the IAB-donor-CU are described in clause 5.3.9 of this document.




M.3  IAB-node Integration Procedure


M.3.1  General

IAB-node, consists of a UE function (referred to as IAB-UE) and gNB-DU
function [2]. IAB integration procedure consists of 3 phases detailed in TS
38.401 [78].

Phase-1: IAB-UE part setup:

The IAB-UE performs registration procedure to the network as a UE as
described in TS 23.501 [2] and TS 23.502 [8] in order to register to the
5GC and consequently, the NAS and AS security are established between the
IAB-node and 5GC.

Phase-2: BH RLC channel establishment and routing update:

The BH RLC channels and the BAP layer are established and configured in the
IAB-node by the IAB-donor using the secured RRC signalling to support
routing between the IAB-node and the IAB-donor.

Phase-3: gNB -DU part setup:

F1 security establishment for IAB is performed over the RLC channel.

The Phase-1 results in IAB-UE registration and consequently, AS security
establishment between the IAB donor and IAB-node, Phase-2 results in
configuration of the IAB-node securely using the established AS security
and Phase-3 results in the establishment of secure F1 interface between the
IAB-donor and IAB-node.


M.3.2  Authentication and Authorization of IAB-node (Phase-1)

The IAB-UE function shall behave as a UE, and shall reuse the UE procedures
specified in this document for the primary authentication (see clause 6),
key derivation and distribution scheme, subscription credential(s) storage
requirements, NAS security and AS security.

NOTE 1: For isolated deployment scenarios, Annex B describes how additional
EAP methods can be used.

NOTE 2: Storage of subscription credentials for EAP AKA and 5G AKA is
described in clause 6 of the present document.

Authorization of IAB-nodes shall be performed by the 5G core network
supporting IAB architecture as described in TS 23.501 [2].


M.3.3  Security mechanisms for F1 interface between the IAB-node (gNB-DU)
         and the IAB-donor-CU (Phase-3)




M.3.3.1  General

The following clause applies to F1 interface between the IAB-node (gNB-DU)
and the IAB-donor-CU.


M.3.3.2  Security mechanisms for the F1 interface

The F1 interface connects the IAB-node (gNB-DU) to the IAB-donor-CU. It
consists of the F1-C for control plane and the F1-U for the user plane.

F1 security for IAB is established using the security mechanisms for the F1
interface as specified in clause 9.8.2 of the present document, with IAB
node taking the role of gNB-DU and IAB-donor-CU taking the role of gNB-CU.

In addition to the security mechanisms specified in clause 9.8.2 of the
present document for the F1 interface, the IKEv2 Pre-shared Secret Key
(PSK) authentication shall be supported. When IKEv2 performs a PSK
authentication, in the IKE_AUTH request message, the IAB node shall set the
ID type to ID_KEY-ID and set its value to PSK ID.

NOTE 1:  The PSK and PSK ID (for IKEv2 PSK authentication) can be
preconfigured at the IAB node and IAB donor. Pre-configuration of the
PSK(s) is out of the scope of the present document.

Additionally, to support a flexible plug and play of IAB-node and IAB-donor
without a pre-configuration of the PSK(s), dynamic PSK computation for
IKEv2 PSK authentication may also be supported. When dynamic PSK is used,
the IAB-node and the IAB-donor shall calculate the PSK (KIAB) as specified
in the Annex A.23 of this document. The IAB-donor shall uniquely identify
the IAB-nodes security context (KgNB) using the IAB-node DU IP address.
The IAB-donor shall use KIAB as PSK for IKEv2 between IAB-node and the IAB-
donor. KIAB is stored in the IAB-node and in the IAB-donor. This key KIAB
and the IPsec SA cryptographic keys are taken into use with the
establishment of IPsec Security Association (SA) between the IAB-node and
the IAB-donor. KIAB remains valid as long as the IAB-node is connected to
the IAB-donor or until the IAB-node is re-authenticated. In case of CP-UP
separation of IAB-donor-CU (IAB-donor-CU contains IAB-donor-CU-CP and IAB-
donor-CU-UP that use different IP address) then, IAB-donor-CU-CP and IAB-
node DU shall generate KIAB-CU-CP and KIAB-CU-UP as specified in the Annex
A.23 of this document. The key KIAB-CU-CP shall be used for establishment
of secure F1 interface between the IAB-node DU and IAB-donor-CU-CP. The IAB-
donor-CU-CP shall provide KIAB-CU-UP to the IAB-donor-CU-UP via E1
interface and KIAB-CU-UP shall be used for establishment of secure F1
interface between the IAB-node DU and IAB-donor-CU-UP.

NOTE 2:  KIAB is used as the PSK for IKEv2 authentication, the interface
between the IAB-donor-CU and the SEG to provision the key KIAB in the SEG
is implementation specific and out of the scope of the present document.




M.4  Protection of management traffic between IAB-node and OAM

If management traffic uses the user plane via PDU session, it shall be
protected using the user plane security mechanism as specified in clause
6.6.





         Annex N (normative):
         Security for URLLC services


N.1  General

This clause describes the security requirements, procedures and handling
for Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communication (URLLC). The procedures and
handling include the enforcing the security policy for data transmission.
The general features for URLLC are described in 23.501 [2], 38.300 [52] and
TS 23.502 [8].


N.2  Security support on redundant transmission


N.2.1  Redundant user plane paths based on dual connectivity


N.2.1.1  Introduction

In order to support URLLC services, a UE sets up two redundant PDU sessions
over the 5G network, such that the 5GS sets up the user plane paths of the
two redundant PDU Sessions to be disjoint as described in clause 5.33 in TS
23.501 [2]. However, NG-RAN may realize redundant user plane resources for
the two PDU sessions with a single NG-RAN node, or by Dual Connectivity
with two NG-RAN nodes, i.e. one PDU session spans from the UE via the MN to
a first UPF and the second PDU session spans from the same UE via the SN to
a second UPF. Based on the two PDU sessions, the redundant data sent
between the UE and the DN takes different paths in the 3GPP network.

The security aspects for redundant PDU sessions transmission by Dual
Connectivity are based on the security procedures and description described
in clause 6.10 of the present specification. This clause only describes the
additional security features.


N.2.2.2  Security policy aspects

When dual connectivity is used for redundant transmission, both of the two
PDU sessions are initially established via the MN. The SMF(s) shall provide
a UP security policy for each of the two PDU sessions to the MN during the
PDU session establishment procedure as described in clause 6.6.1. The UP
security policy from the SMF(s) for the two PDU sessions used for redundant
data transmission shall have the same setting for encryption and for
integrity protection. The network (UDM and/or SMF) shall ensure that all
the redundant PDU sessions based on the information sent by the UE as
described in TS 23.501 [2] shall have same UP security policy setting.

The MN shall be preconfigured or shall have access to the supported
security capabilities in the available SN(s), (i.e. to whether UP integrity
protection is supported in the SN or not). The MN shall take the received
UP security policy into account when selecting the SN.

MN shall ensure that the first and the redundant PDU sessions shall have
the same UP security activation status. If the "Preferred" option of the UP
security policy is not allowed to be used for URLLC service at the SMF or
UDM, which means the SMF or UDM can guaranteethe UP security policy for the
first and the redundant PDU sessions are the same and only contains "Not
needed", or "Required", then the MN shall forward the UP security policy to
the SN as described in clause 6.10.

If the "Preferred" option of the UP security policy is allowed to be used
for URLLC services, the following enhancements for the mechanism as
described in clause 6.10 for Dual Connectivity shall be applied

-  The MN shall make the decision on UP encryption protection and integrity
protection according to the UP security policy for these two redundant data
transmissions. The MN shall store the applied UP security activation status
used for the DRBs established for the first PDU session between the MN and
the UE. Then, the MN shall provide the UP security activation status
applied for the first PDU session to the SN, when offloading the DRBs for
the second PDU session to the SN.

-  The SN shall use the UP security activation status received from the MN
to activate the UP security for the DRBs established for the redundant PDU
session between the SN and the UE.


N.2.2  Redundant transmission on N3/N9 interfaces

If the user data redundancy is fulfilled by means of two duplicated N3
tunnels, the redundant packets will be transferred between UPF and RAN via
two independent N3 tunnels, which are associated with a single PDU Session,
over different transport layer path to enhance the reliability of service.

[pic]

Figure N.2.2-1: Redundant transmission with two N3 tunnels between the UPF
and a single NG-RAN node

In order to protect the redundant traffic on the N3 reference point, the
current mechanism defined in clause 9.3 of the present document shall be
reused. The added path for redundancy shall provide equal level of security
compared to single path.

In case two N9 tunnels are involved to fulfil the redundancy for one NG-
RAN, the NDS/IP mechanism shall be used for protecting the redundant data
transferring via two N9 tunnels as described above.



         Annex O (Informative):
         Authentication for non-5G capable devices behind residential
         gateways


O.1  General

This annex describes the authentication procedure, using EAP-TLS as an
example, for Non-5G Capable (N5GC) devices behind Residential Gateways
(RGs) in private networks or in isolated deployment scenarios (i.e.,
roaming is not considered) with wireline access. The registration procedure
of N5GC devices behind Cable RGs is described in clause 4.10a of TS 23.316
[79].


O.2  Baseline for using non-5G capable devices with 5GC

N5GC devices lack some key 5G capabilities, including NAS and the
derivation of 5G key hierarchy. Those devices exist in wireline networks
and need to be able to access the converged 5G core. The authentication of
N5GC devices can be based on additional EAP methods other than EAP-AKA.
The procedure in O.3 uses EAP-TLS as in Annex B as an example, but it
differs from the Annex B in the following:

a) the W-AGF creates the registration request on behalf of the N5GC device,

b) 5G related parameters (including ngKSI and ABBA) are not sent to the
N5GC device. When received from the AMF, these parameters are ignored by
the W-AGF, and

c) Neither the N5GC device nor the AUSF derives any 5G related keys after
EAP authentication.


O.3  Authentication procedure

Figure O.3-1 shows the details of the authentication procedure as part of
the initial registration procedure specified in clause 4.10a of TS 23.316
[79] following the principles listed in clause O.2. It uses EAP-TLS as an
example, but other EAP methods can also be supported. The W-AGF acts on
behalf of the N5GC device during the registration process. The link between
the N5GC device and the RG, and between the RG and the W-AGF can be any
data link (L2) that supports EAP encapsulation.



[pic]

Figure O.3-1: Registration and authentication of a non-5G capable device to
the 5GC


In the following, the procedure for registration and authentication of an
N5GC device to the 5GC is described:

1.  The N5GC device connects to the W-AGF via a RG which is configured as a
layer 2 bridge. The W-AGF is associated with a 5GC and acts on behalf of
the N5GC device during its registration process.

2a. The W-AGF initiates the EAP authentication procedure by sending an EAP
request/Identity to the N5GC device via the RG, which acts as an L2 bridge
device and forwards the ethernet frame to the N5GC device. The EAP message
is encapsualted inside an L2 frame (e.g., EAPOL).

2b. In response, the N5GC device sends back an EAP response/Identity
including its Network Access Identifier (NAI) in the form of
username@realm.

NOTE 1: If TLS subscription identifier privacy protection is supported , as
in "Section 2.1.4. Privacy" of RFC 5216 [38] for TLS 1.2 or in RFC 8446
[60] for TLS 1.3, the "username" part must be is either omitted or
"anonymous".

3. The W-AGF creates a registration request on behalf of the N5GC device
with an indication that the registration is on behalf of an N5GC device.
The SUPI of the N5GC device is the NAI as received from the device, and the
W-AGF constructs the SUCI from this SUPI using the NULL scheme.

4a. The W-AGF selects the AMF/SEAF.

4b. The W-AGF sends to the AMF/SEAF a registration request on behalf of the
N5GC device. The registration request includes the NAI SUCI, wireline
network name if available, and a device capability indicator (e.g., the
device is non-5G capable).

4c. The AMF/SEAF selects the AUSF based on the SUCI in the received
registration request and sends a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Request message to the AUSF. It contains the SUCI of the N5GC device, and
an indicator that the request is on behalf of the N5GC device.

5a. The AUSF sends a Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Request to the UDM. It
contains the SUCI of the N5GC device and the N5GC device indicator.

5b. The UDM invokes the SIDF to map the SUCI to the SUPI and selects an
authentication method, e.g., EAP-TLS, based on the SUPI. When the
"username" part of the SUPI is "anonymous" or omitted, the UDM may select
an authentication method based on the realm part of the SUPI, the N5GC
device indicator, a combination of the "realm" part and the N5GC device
indicator, or the UDM local policy.

5c. The UDM sends a Nudm_UEAuthentication_Get Response to the AUSF, which
contains the SUPI of the N5GC device and an indicator of the selected
authentication method, e.g., EAP-TLS.

NOTE 2: Steps 6a-14c describe the exchange of EAP-TLS between the AUSF and
the N5GC device, based on TLS 1.2 without subscription identifier privacy
protection. If the operator determines to provide subscription identifier
privacy for the N5GC in TLS layer, the EAP TLS server needs to support
privacy either inherently (e.g., in TLS 1.3) or via separate privacy option
(e.g., in TLS 1.2). When TLS 1.2 is used, the N5GC device would need to
behave as described in "Section 2.1.4. Privacy" of RFC 5216 [38] where
instead of sending the client certificate in cleartext over the air, the
N5GC device sends TLS certificate (no cert) during the first TLS handshake
and sends TLS certificate (client certificate) during the second TLS
handshake within the TLS session negotiated form the first TLS handshake.

6a.  The AUSF starts EAP-TLS by sending to the AMF/SEAF a
Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message containing an EAP-
Request message of EAP-type=EAP-TLS with the Start (S) bit set, denoted as
EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [TLS start].

6b.  The AMF/SEAF forwards the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [TLS start] in the
Authentication Request message to the W-AGF.

6c. After receiving the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [TLS start] message from
AMF/SEAF, the W-AGF forwards the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [TLS start] message to
the N5GC device in an L2 message, leaving out the ABBA and ngKSI
parameters.

7a. After receiving the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [TLS start] message from the W-
AGF, the N5GC device replies to the W-AGF with an EAP-Response/EAP-TLS
message whose data field encapsulates a TLS client_hello message. Such EAP-
Response message, denoted as EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [client_hello], is
encapsulated in an L2 message.

7b.  The W-AGF forwards the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [client_hello] to the
AMF/SEAF in an Authentication Response message.

7c.  The AMF/SEAF forwards the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [client_hello] message
to the AUSF in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message.

8a.  The AUSF replies to the AMF/SEAF with EAP-Request/EAP-TLS message
whose data field encapsulates a TLS server_hello message, a TLS server
certificate message, a TLS server_key_exchange message, a TLS client
certificate_request message, and a TLS server_hello_done message. Such EAP-
Request message, denoted as EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [server_hello], is
encapsulated in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message.

8b.  The AMF/SEAF forwards the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [server_hello] message
to the W-AGF in an Authentication Request message.

8c. The W-AGF forwards the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [server_hello] to the N5GC
device in an L2 message.

9. The N5GC device authenticates the AUSF by validating the server
certificate included in the EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [server_hello] message
received in step 8c. The N5GC device needs to be provisioned with
certificates of a trust anchor to validate the AUSF server certificate. In
addition, the N5GC device also needs to be provisioned with its own client
certificate.

10a. If the TLS server authentication is successful, then the N5GC device
replies to the W-AGF with EAP-Response/EAP-TLS in an L2 message. The data
field of the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS message contains a TLS client certificate
message, a TLS client_key_exchange message, a TLS certificate_verify
message, a TLS change_cipher_spec message, and TLS finished message. This
EAP-Response message is denoted as EAP-Response/EAP-TLS
[client_certificate].

10b. The W-AGF forwards to the AMF/SEAF the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS
[client_certificate] in an Authentication Response message.

10c. The AMF/SEAF forwards the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [client_certificate]
message to the AUSF in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request
message.

11.  The AUSF authenticates the N5GC device by verifying the client
certificate received in the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [client_certificate]
message. Among other validations, the AUSF verifies that the client
certificate is issued by a certificate authority trusted by the AUSF. If
the client certificate is verified successfully, the AUSF continues to step
12a. Otherwise the AUSF returns an EAP-failure message. The AUSF needs to
be provisioned with certificates of trust anchor to verify client
certificates.

12a. The AUSF sends to the AMF/SEAF an EAP-Request/EAP-TLS message with its
data field encapsulating a TLS change_cipher_spec message and a TLS server
finished. This EAP-Request message, denoted as EAP-Request/EAP-TLS
[server_finished], is encapsulated in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate
Response message.

12b. The AMF/SEAF forwards EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [server_finished] message to
the W-AGF in an Authentication Request message.

12c. The W-AGF forwards EAP-Request/EAP-TLS [server_finished] message to
the N5GC device in an L2 message.

13a. The N5GC sends to the W-AGF an EAP-Response/EAP-TLS message with its
data field set to empty, denoted as EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [empty], in an L2
message

13b. The W-AGF forwards to the AMF/SEAF the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [empty]
message in an Authentication Response message.

13c. The AMF/SEAF forwards the EAP-Response/EAP-TLS [empty] message to the
AUSF in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Request message.

14a. The AUSF sends to the AMF/SEAF an EAP-Success message along with the
SUPI in a Nausf_UEAuthentication_Authenticate Response message. If the SUPI
received from the UDM in step 5c is anonymous, the AUSF derives the SUPI
from the client identifier in the TLS client certificate. AUSF does not
perform the derivation of KAUSF nor KSEAF based on the indicator of an N5GC
device received in step 4c, nor sends KSEAF to AMF/SEAF.

NOTE 2a: It is left to implementation if the AUSF verifies that the SUPI
derived from the client certificate belongs to a valid susbcription in the
network and returns an EAP-failure message if there is a miss-match.

14b. The AMF/SEAF forwards to the W-AGF the EAP-Success message in an
Authentication Result message or a Security Mode Command message.

14c. The W-AGF forwards to the N5GC device the EAP-Success message in an L2
message, and the authentication procedure is finished.

NOTE 3:  Neither the AUSF nor the N5GC device performs further 5G related
key derivation from EMSK, since neither 5G AS nor 5G NAS security is used
in this setting.

15. The AUSF sends a UDM_Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation Request
message to the UDM, including the SUPI obtained from the TLS client
certificate, SN-name, the authentication method (i.e., EAP-TLS), the
authentication result, and a timestamp.

16. The UDM stores the authentication result accordingly.

17. The UDM sends a UDM_Nudm_UEAuthentication_ResultConfirmation Response
message to the AUSF.

18. The AMF sends a Nudm_UEContextManagement_Registration Request message
to the UDM.

19. The UDM authorizes the registration request based on authentication
result stored in step 16 and other information (e.g., UE subscription
profile).

20. The UDM sends a Nudm_UEContextManagement_Registration Response message
to the AMF.

21. The AMF sends Registration Accept message to the W-AGF